WHEN Kierkegaard wrote these words in 1852, nine years after the publication
of Either/Or, he was looking back on his working life as a deed on behalf of
Christian awakening. By then his targets had become the Danish clergy:
‘servants of Christianity’ who, in the prevailing tendency to ‘idolize mediocrity’,
had ‘shrewdly’ exploited the ‘pagan optimism’ which made Christianity
commensurable with all things finite, and managed to reap the benefits of a
‘both/and’ which made being a Christian just another item on the list.
Either/Or had no such clear-cut target. It was written still some time before the
notion of a ‘leap’ into a distinctively Christian point of view crystallized in
Kierkegaard’s writings. The motivation for the work was probably a
combination of two things: the fateful choice Kierkegaard had just made in his
own life by breaking off an engagement and his confrontation with the
philosophy of Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling, from whose lectures in
Berlin he sought a philosophical answer to Hegelianism. Schelling (in lectures
published posthumously as Philosophy of Revelation and Philosophy of
Mythology) was presenting reality (or ‘actuality’) as a free action of a personal
God, instead of as the outcome of historical or spiritual necessity. Though at first
enthusiastic,
* Kierkegaard soon saw that Schelling’s was not the promised
radical criticism of Hegelian philosophy he had hoped for. What was needed was
a ‘doubled-edged little dagger’ with which he could ‘assassinate’ the whole of
reality: the ‘either/or’.
†
In March 1842, after four months in Berlin, Kierkegaard returned to
Copenhagen. Either/Or was published on 20 February the following year.
According to Kierkegaard himself it took eleven months to write. Part Two was
written first and already completed while he was in Berlin; most of Part One was
written after his return.
‡ The ‘editor’s’ preface, written last, was ready in
November 1842. The official chronology gives approximately 7 December 1841
as the date of completion of the second of the two main sections of Part Two. So,
assuming he wrote the sections consecutively and in Berlin, as he must have if
eleven months is an accurate estimate, that is a truly astonishing achievement, all
the more so in view of the fact that he was at the same time attending lectures at
the University. The completion dates of the essays in Part One indicate that these
too were written in a different order from that in which they eventually appeared.
Thus the concluding ‘Seducer’s Diary’ was completed before the first main essay
on the ‘Immediate Erotic Stages’. This suggests that the writing itself may not
have followed any conscious plan or strategy discernible in the work as we now
have it.
This is part of the fascination of Either/Or. True to its title, Kierkegaard’s
classic places many choices in its would-be reader’s path and almost as many
temptations – mostly, as hinted here, of interpretation. But there are also
practical choices and temptations to consider, the first prompted by the work’s
sheer size: Must I really read the whole thing? The standard two-volume format
invites a rather handy answer to that question by offering a prior choice: Do I
have to buy both volumes?
Vain searches for the first volume among shelves full of copies of the second
quickly reveal the outcome of that short-lived choice. Although what this
particular preference very likely indicates is the continuing reputation of
Kierkegaard’s portrayals of the aesthetic way of life, rather than penury, say, or
normal human postponement, the author himself would hardly approve.
Commenting on the work’s critics, Kierkegaard says, ‘If someone starts by
saying “either” – and doesn’t conceal from the listener that the first clause is
going to be a very long one, you owe it to him either to ask him not to begin or
to listen also to his “or”.’
* An advantage of the single-volume version offered
here is that it ensures that would-be readers give themselves the chance also to
read Kierkegaard’s ‘or’.
Against that, however, we are offering an abridgement, which surely deprives
readers of a choice the author would definitely wish them to retain. Indeed
Kierkegaard says one should either read the whole or not read it at all. So what
justification is there for not merely defying the author’s express wishes here, but
also for disallowing a privilege any reader of a classic is surely entitled to,
namely to read such a work in its entirety?
The original 1843 edition, to whose reception Kierkegaard was reacting, was
also in two volumes. Perhaps in view of his comments a second edition, of 1849,
appeared in a single volume. But later editions, encumbered with an increasingly
demanding annotational apparatus (to say nothing of introductions), have been
forced into the two-volume format by plain bulk. The most obvious justification
for an abridgement, therefore, is the making available once more of a portable
(and readable) single-volume edition able nevertheless to incorporate at least a
minimum of annotational material and an introduction. Naturally, if the cuts
involve a serious loss of meaning, that is not a satisfactory reason. Since,
however, a lengthy discussion of this question would be self-defeating in the
present context, we must let the following clarifications and comments suffice.
Besides the omission of a few ‘diapsalmata’, one shorter essay, ‘The First
Love’, is omitted in its entirety from Part One (as well as short sections in other
essays making reference to it). A commentary on a one-act comedy by the
French dramatist A. E. Scribe, this was the outcome of an essay Kierkegaard had
apparently begun before forming any clear idea of the later project. The comedy
was familiar to Copenhagen theatregoers, who would also be among
Kierkegaard’s readers, and they would be in an excellent position to appreciate
this illustration of an important idea in the work. But the commentary
undoubtedly loses something in narrative coherence to readers lacking that
familiarity, and since the idea itself is discussed copiously elsewhere in the work,
it was decided to omit this essay in preference to others.
The omissions from Part Two are of a different kind. Although conveniently
contributing to the provision of a slimmer volume, the cuts here are designed
primarily to bring the line of Vilhelm’s argument into greater relief and thus to
help it make a more immediate impact upon the reader. Whatever the purist’s
misgivings, the result is at least better than the far more drastic abridgements
usually resorted to, patched out of passages quoted out of context in textbooks.
As for Kierkegaard’s own insistence that the work be read in its entirety or not
at all, that too should be read in context. Kierkegaard is complaining that
although they have been provided with both an ‘either’ and an ‘or’, his critics
have shown interest only in the ‘either’, some only in the ‘Seducer’s Diary’. By
saying ‘read it all or not at all’, Kierkegaard means first of all ‘read at least both
my “either” and my “or”’.
With these practical decisions behind us and a firm reader’s commitment to a
qualified ‘both/and’, there remain the choices, and temptations, of interpretation.
The situation is less straightforward than it can seem. That is, one cannot
immediately assume that the point or significance of Either/Or is adequately put
by saying that the work provides readers with the opportunity to ask themselves
which of the two points of view represented they themselves prefer. Many
questions intervene. Just how distinct are the two points of view? Why can’t they
be combined? What if we don’t feel like assenting to either? And isn’t it really
obvious that we are supposed to assent in the end to the ethical point of view
anyway? But then what if I don’t feel like doing that? Must I conclude that I’ve
missed something, or is it because something is missing in me?
Later generations are sometimes said to be better placed to make sense of a
significant work of literature than its contemporaries. That is claimed
particularly in the case of a significantly innovative work, a category to which
Either/Or clearly belongs. The reason offered is that the contemporary lacks the
perspective needed for seeing the work’s real significance, and lacks it
necessarily since the perspective and its distance are not yet in place.
* That may
well be true, but time can complicate the picture as much as clarify it. There are
two mutually reinforcing factors why this should be especially true of Either/Or.
One factor is a general truth about literary classics. They become parts of
traditions which they help to sustain but also to change. Readings of them can
therefore reflect two quite different points of view: that of their origin and that of
their (always provisional) destination. No doubt it is also true that what makes a
work a classic (something one of the essays in Part One of Either/Or is much
concerned with) is in part its ability to perform these functions at the propitious
time. Since this factor is bound up in Kierkegaard’s case with his reputation as
‘the father of existentialism’, there is a not unnatural tendency to read Either/Or
as an expression of such modern existentialist notions as that of radical
commitment, of which more in a moment. This perspective obscures the fact that
Either/Or is Kierkegaard’s first main work, and therefore also the possibility that
one can read it in a more historical light. There is also the fact – though one
might well choose to ignore it, believing an author’s works once completed to be
self-sufficient – of Kierkegaard’s own changing attitudes to the work.
Compounding this confusion is the second factor: the author’s notorious
practice of concealing himself behind a barrage of pseudonyms. Either/Or is
exemplary in this respect, wrapped as it is in several layers of pseudonymity. The
two main parts are assigned to two fictitious authors, the first part containing
what is at least made to look like a diary by a third author, and the second
containing a sermon by a fourth. On top of that the work is as a whole presented
by a pseudonymous editor in a fictitious preface.
Why such subterfuge? Well, of course it wasn’t really subterfuge on
Kierkegaard’s part. Nobody was taken in, at least not for long, and given the
pseudonyms Kierkegaard chose it would be ludicrous to suppose he intended
that they should be. At most he may have hoped to spread uncertainty for a while
as to whether it was he or someone else lurking behind the strange Latinized
pseudonyms.
But then again these pseudonyms are not just means of concealment. Literal
translations can disclose their special signatures in the form of a variety of points
of departure, positions, or perspectives. Thus Johannes de silentio, the ‘author’
of Fear and Trembling, writes about something of which he himself says one
cannot intelligibly speak, namely that Abraham’s intention to sacrifice Isaac
should be an act of faith.
* Of Either/Or, Kierkegaard later wrote that when
writing the work he was ‘already in a cloister, which thought is hidden in the
pseudonym: Victor Eremita’.
† What does that tell us? Kierkegaard says in the
same passage that when writing the book he had long given up the thought of a
comfortingly marital solution to life. Although it is not clear whether he means
life in general or his own, the remark at least indicates that he himself was not
prepared to follow Vilhelm’s advice; yet that hardly justifies the inference that
Kierkegaard himself thought the advice should not be followed. Nor does it
justify our saying of Victor Eremita, as does one commentator, that he is ‘no
more taken in by the aesthete’s paean to enjoyment than he is by the Judge’s
vision of marriage’.
*
Yet that is surely an interesting possibility; it would mean that at least from the
fictitious editor’s point of view, the proper conclusion to draw from reading
Either/Or is ‘neither/nor’. So although the fact that Eremita is looking at things
from the coolness of a cloister doesn’t indeed force us to assume that he
occupies some vantage-point superior to the two he presents, the ultimate
‘significance’ of Either/Or – even in Kierkegaard’s mind – might still be that he
does occupy that position, and that we should therefore somehow seek in
deficiencies of both views the basis of a third.
But then, whether we place Eremita above, below, or behind his two
protagonists, we are still one layer away from Kierkegaard himself. So we can
still think of him as occupying another position. Or none. This latter is a useful
idea. One way of looking at the pseudonymity is to note how it enables
Kierkegaard to disown authority for what he writes. It ‘scrambles’ the author–
reader link in a way that allows the writings to enjoy a genuinely independent
existence, letting them become considerations in the mind of the reader, to do
there whatever work they have it in themselves to do.
† Moreover, if dissolving
the semblance or pretence of authority inherent in acknowledged authorship is
one advantage of pseudonymity, another – the opposite side of the same coin – is
that it also absolves a writer of personal responsibility for the views expressed,
thus freeing him of the potential restrictions on movement imposed by an
accumulating authorial past.
Time can not only make the search for a literary work’s meaning complicated,
it can positively distort that meaning. This factor is important in assessing a quite
common reaction to Part Two. Judge Vilhelm strikes many as a hopeless bore
and hypocrite. And there can be no doubt that our modern climate of opinion
makes his defence of marriage look very like a classic case of male chauvinism.
In deference to the author, those who see Vilhelm in this light may then suppose
that this is what Kierkegaard intended. But then there are also other negative
responses that conflict with this one. Some see in Vilhelm a fantast, a romantic,
playing the same kind of game as his young friend the aesthete, but with his
dreams being played out in social and family forms. Both these responses may
be due to a cultural cleft. Thus we might surmise that our modern age has lost
(as surely almost by definition it has) certain kinds of background attitudes
necessary for taking Vilhelm’s seriousness as seriously as he himself takes it –
and as seriously as he would like the aesthete to take it. If that hypothesis were
true, we would then have to ask whether the modern positions or perspectives
from which we make such judgements are in some universally valid sense
superior to those envisioned for his readers by Kierkegaard. But the possibility
would also have to be faced that we have lapsed into a position already
envisioned by Kierkegaard, indeed into something Vilhelm himself might feel
justified in calling ‘despair’. Might not the conclusion we reach after reading
Either/Or, then, be that we, or most of us, are ‘mere’ aesthetes?
Thus, apart from the possibility of a neither/nor reading, a crucial question
which awaits the person who decides against that reading, and assumes therefore
that Kierkegaard definitely intends one of the two views presented to be lifeaffirming, is ‘Which?’.
We must be careful to separate that question from another, namely, ‘Which, if
either, do I take to be life-affirming?’. Whether due to the cultural cleft or just to
a significant shift in climate, it is of course quite plausible that a reader’s
response to Either/Or should be quite different from Kierkegaard’s own. But that
raises another question that must be answered before the two questions can be
taken to be as different as may at first be supposed. That question is: ‘In writing
Either/Or did Kierkegaard believe it more important that readers decide for
themselves which life-view is life-affirming than that they should see the matter
as he did?’ But even there we haven’t reached rock bottom. We can also wonder
whether Kierkegaard, had he suspected that Vilhelm’s case might lose its appeal,
could have approved of attempts to update his portrait of the ethical in order to
restore that appeal, for example by making Vilhelm a feminist.
Alternatively, in order to escape this plethora of options, the reader may choose
another, totally ignoring what Kierkegaard might have meant and simply reading
the work as though first published today, and reading it in an altogether openminded way just to see where the portrait fits and to find out how far the choices
can affect one’s value-horizon.
Consistently with a negative evaluation of Vilhelm’s case for the ethical goes a
typically modern predilection for his aesthetic counterpart. Indeed it could be
said that the less conviction Vilhelm’s portrayal of the supposedly fulfilling life
of the ethicist carries, the more plausibly his young friend appears to us in the
guise of the modern hero, richly egocentric, tragically melancholic, excitingly
nihilistic, daringly imaginative. There is indeed a cultural stereotype of the
aesthete that fits well with Kierkegaard’s portrait. It is amply represented in both
nineteenth-and twentieth-century literature, no better perhaps than in the one-act
plays of the Austrian writer Arthur Schnitzler (1862–1931).
* Looking at the
work in this light, favouring as it does a monocular focusing on Kierkegaard’s
‘either’, we can simply choose to ignore whatever evidence there is that
Kierkegaard is conducting a campaign on behalf of his ethical ‘or’. We prize
instead his contribution to a progressive aesthetic culture. Perhaps we can even
broaden the perspective in a binocular direction just enough to reveal the ethicist
as representative of a powerful but oppressive tradition unfriendly to life and
ready for replacement by some aesthetic alternative, even ripe for some sabotage
from the aesthetic camp itself.
The fact that it would not be wholly perverse to choose to look at Either/Or in
this way is an indication of the work’s immense cultural resources. But it also
helps us to see more clearly just what kind of war Kierkegaard thought he was
waging, against whom, and with what victory in mind. The target or enemy was
philosophy. That in itself dictates that the weapons with which he was committed
to prosecuting his campaign were literary rather than philosophical. It was the
spirit of philosophy itself, incarnate in Hegel, that Kierkegaard was out to
destroy, and in order to break with Hegel he could not resort to the discursive
and systematic methods of the Hegelians themselves. Kierkegaard had to appeal
to his reader’s sensibilities. Hegel was to be destroyed in subsequent works
(notably in Concluding Unscientific Postscript) mainly by appeal to the reader’s
sense of the ridiculous. But the most important point to be clear about is that the
victory Kierkegaard had in mind was not merely the destruction of Hegel; it was
the retrieval from philosophy of legitimate human goals (ethical and religious
understanding) which he believed philosophy had usurped and dreadfully
distorted. This positive appeal, then, had to be first of all to our senses of
fulfilment in life, in pleasure or a sense of beauty, from which alone the ethically
crucial sense of a want of fulfilment could then be elicited in the reader.
Kierkegaard was thus able to put his native literary talent to the edifying task of
regenerating ethics in the ordinary-life situations that make up a human life. The
means he created are the books of his pseudonymous authorship.
In an important comment on Either/Or, ‘leaked’ by another of his pseudonyms,
Kierkegaard gives us to understand that the work’s special purpose was to
‘exhibit the existential relationship between the aesthetic and the ethical in an
existing individual’, the motive behind this being the need to remind people
‘what it means to exist, and what inwardness signifies’. This was something that,
‘because of the great increase of knowledge’, his age had forgotten. ‘Knowledge’
here is an ironic reference to Hegelian philosophy, a ‘system’ of thought which
accords no ultimate value to subjectivity, sensibility or inwardness. Of the
German philosopher Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi (1743–1819), criticized for
subordinating the realm of knowledge to that of feeling and faith, this other
pseudonym, Johannes Climacus, says:
Poor Jacobi! Whether anyone visits your grave I do not know, but I know that the paragraph-plough digs all your eloquence, all your
inwardness under, while a few scant words are registered in the System as what you amount to. It says of him that he represented
feeling with enthusiasm; a reference like that makes fun of both feeling and enthusiasm, whose secret is precisely that they cannot be
reported at second-hand …*
Whatever the ethical view of life has to offer, then, it can only direct its appeal to
individual sensibility. But that of course means directing it to where the aesthetic
view of life also makes its appeal. So aesthetics is where one inevitably has to
begin, and that applies equally to the religious view of life, not portrayed in this
work but glimpsed in the ‘sermon’ appended as a ‘last word’ (Ultimatum) to
Judge Vilhelm’s second letter. In the same passage Climacus comments on the
absence of a distinctively religious perspective in Either/Or, but says that the fact
that his age had forgotten what it is to exist religiously implied also that people
had first of all forgotten what it was to exist as human beings. Either/Or is the
required reminder, a necessary prolegomenon to the reminders to come, about
what it is to lead, first, a religious existence and then, secondly, a specifically
Christian existence.
We now find ourselves face to face with one final interpretational either/or. As
we noted earlier, reading Kierkegaard from within the perspective of modern
existentialism, some people interpret the choice between an aesthetic and an
ethical view of life in terms of a ‘radical choice’. In place of ‘radical’ the term
‘criterionless’ is sometimes used; a choice made according to some criterion not
exclusively part of the view itself would not be criterionless, and the choice
would therefore not be radical enough to cover the transition from the aesthetic
to the ethical point of view. Each Kierkegaardian ‘stage’ or ‘sphere’ of existence
in effect represents an atomically distinctive answer to the question, ‘What is it
essentially to be a human being?’. The radical nature of the choice lies in the fact
that in choosing one of the stages you are also choosing the kinds of reason
available to you for defending the choice.
The peculiarly ‘modern’ touch to this is the belief that the notion of a
criterionless choice is a way of expressing an insight the gaining of which marks
the coming of age of our culture. It involves recognizing an irreducible
multiplicity of cultural traditions, irreducible in the sense that there is no general
basic principle for deciding between them. If we have to conclude from this, as
well we might, that values in general are no more than expressions of habitual
and basically arbitrary preferences, we may look on this positively as a release
from bad philosophical habits, or else negatively as a cultural nightmare. But
some people advocate an ‘Aristotelian’ solution which (to exploit a not at all
inappropriately biological metaphor) would let values grow in specific cultures.
Here the notion of ‘radicalness’ would apply only in the sense that given cultural
contexts were what provided values with their ‘roots’. Those who advocate such
a solution see Existentialists with their ‘radical choices’ as engaged in a hopeless
task, trying with the mere choosing to confer on the choice that substantial
quality it can only acquire within a culture to which the chooser also belongs.
*
If one considers briefly what this idea of a radical choice implies, the criticism
seems justified. It means that the chooser stands outside the options offered, so
whichever one is picked is selected as arbitrarily as one picks a chocolate from a
box not knowing what kind of centre it has, though here one is not even
supposed to care. Since there are no operative preferences upon which the
selection is based – they all belong to the alternatives on offer – it would be
appropriate to describe this as a case of picking rather than choosing. By the
same token there can be no inter-‘stage’ or inter-‘sphere’ dialogue. Naturally,
there can be dialogue in the sense of conversations about matters of shared
interest, swapping of information and so on, as well as disputes about things on
which there is disagreement. But there can be no way of settling basic disputes,
no shared basis of considerations to which, say, an ethicist can appeal to try to
win over an aesthete. So if Vilhelm offers arguments to his friend, these will
have no effect if they are arguments sincerely offered in defence of the ethical
way of life. If they are to have any effect, either his friend must already have
taken leave of the aesthetic world and be able and willing to see the point of
arguments based on ethical criteria, or else Vilhelm will have to deliberately
phrase his arguments in terms of aesthetic values to which he himself does not
subscribe. He will then have to lure his friend into the ethical with arguments
that, if he really stood by them, would place him in the aesthetic world alongside
his friend.
Yet however radically the views presented in Either/Or differ, it is hard not to
see the work as having the character of a dialogue. Part One contains implicit
arguments against the ethical life-view, which are then rebutted in Part Two.
There are also such arguments in Part Two, in the form of objections to ethical
ideals that Vilhelm recalls his young friend having voiced and to which he
replies. Further, it would be hard to read the two main sections in Part Two
otherwise than as a sustained argument in favour of the ethical life-view, which
is also continually underpinned by arguments against the aesthetic life-view. So
‘either’ there is a great deal of indirect persuasion and subterfuge, hardly a good
advertisement at least for a supposedly ethical life-view, ‘or’ the radical-choice
reading is mistaken.
But since dialogues do nevertheless aim at agreement, if only on some position
that turns out to be neither of the original alternatives, and since agreement
surely requires some kind of choice on the part of at least one of the participants,
there should still be room for an either/or and so for a choice. There are,
however, a number of quite different ways in which we might think of a choice
occurring in conclusion of a dialogue. One would be where one party convinces
the other by making him see how what he says ‘stands to reason’. There would,
however, be no appeal to ‘inwardness’ here; the dialogue might be said to occur
only at a ‘paragraph-ploughing’ level. Another way, that did appeal to
inwardness and sensibility, could be one in which the convinced party simply
goes over to the new position as a matter of course in the light of certain appeals
to which he was already attuned but about whose relevance to the case in hand
he had not been clear. The function of the dialogue would be to bring about that
clarity and the result might still, though only just, be called a kind of choice.
Neither of these captures the sense of choice required by Vilhelm of his young
friend’s entering upon the ethical life. That choice, as the reader discovers, is
said to be ‘of oneself’; and part of what that means is precisely that one no
longer regards oneself as a being who, as in the second case, moves from one
position to another simply from the weight or pressure of argument or
circumstance. The ethical life involves rejecting any idea of oneself as just a
passive accumulator, or in the case of the mature aesthete also imaginative
manipulator, of life’s contingent blessings; it requires acceptance of the quite
different idea that one is a responsible agent. The ‘choice of oneself’ is therefore
one that cuts short the passivity and imaginative manipulation. It requires, first,
that one acknowledge a peculiarly human ability, indeed a need, to ask what it is
essentially to be a human being. Second, it requires that one take this ability at
its face value, as a genuine freedom to stake out one’s own future according to a
‘view of life’; and, third, it requires that the view of life one adopts be one in
which one is ‘revealed’ in a context of familial and social responsibilities.
‘Revelation’ here does not mean the disclosure of a self that was previously
hidden; a hidden ‘self’ is precisely not a self in Vilhelm’s sense. The choice of
oneself is the choice of visible selfhood, placing the chooser firmly within the
area of public morality, and amenable for the first time to the ethical categories
of good and bad, praise and blame.
This choice is clearly still a radical one. And its radicalness still lies in the total
redefining of the values of a human life. It is important to realize the compass of
the redefinition. It isn’t a matter simply of turning over a new leaf; the choice of
oneself means rewriting the whole book. In choosing oneself, as Vilhelm says,
one takes responsibility for one’s past and ‘repents’ for not having taken on this
responsibility earlier. The ethicist’s task as Vilhelm sees it, then, is to persuade
the aesthete of the urgency of the choice. But this task is made the easier by the
fact that the mature aesthete’s life has already taken a form which an ethical
redefinition of values can be seen to fit, as easily in principle as a glove fits a
hand, the actual practice requiring only the will to put it on. His aestheticism is
driving him out of the world in which his pleasure is sought; it has driven him
into a corner from where he has to rely on his ingenuity and imagination to keep
things going, on his ability to enjoy things in reflection, to enjoy the idea of
things rather than the things themselves. He should be well disposed in principle
at least, then, to seeing what Vilhelm is getting at when he describes the
aesthete’s life as one of ‘despair’. But he should be able also to see the point of
Vilhelm’s advice to ‘choose despair’ rather than, say, some occupation or
marrying, where these would be undertaken as expedients for just the kinds of
reasons that an aesthete must give. Finally, then, if that is the case he might also
be able to see how both getting a job and marrying might be radically
reconceived as vehicles of human fulfilment instead of as expedients.
Getting a job and marrying were things Kierkegaard himself conspicuously
failed to do. The background to that fact and a short account of the events in
Kierkegaard’s life prior and subsequent to the publication of Either/Or may help
to put its subject-matter in perspective, as well as providing the reader unfamiliar
with the details of Kierkegaard’s life with the benefit of a brief portrait.
The sequence of events which turned Søren Aabye Kierkegaard to full-time
authorship began in 1837 when he met Regine Olsen, daughter of a Copenhagen
dignitary. Regine was then fourteen years old. The following year Kierkegaard’s
father died, aged eighty-one (Kierkegaard was then twenty-five). Kierkegaard’s
father had exercised a largely oppressive influence on his son from early
childhood, and Kierkegaard later said that he had never enjoyed a proper
childhood. Two years before the meeting with Regine he had been describing
Christianity, associated with his father, as a debilitating influence and, looking
about him for some other idea ‘to live or die for’,
* he gave up his studies and led
outwardly the life of an aesthete and wit. Entries in his Journal tell a different
story. Kierkegaard was undergoing a period of deep and even occasionally
suicidal depression. But the year before his father died came the first meeting
with Regine, and Kierkegaard effected a reconciliation with his father shortly
before the latter’s death.
Just one month later Kierkegaard published his first book, From the Papers of
One Still Living, though the title derives not from his father’s death but the death
in the same year of Søren’s teacher and friend, Poul Martin Møller (1794–1838).
A little over two years later Kierkegaard became engaged to Regine. He
underwent practical training for a career in the State Church and in 1841
published and publicly defended his doctoral thesis, The Concept of Irony with
Constant Reference to Socrates. Since he had already preached his first sermon,
all seemed set for a life of conventional civic virtue. But well before the end of
that year Kierkegaard had returned Regine’s engagement ring. The reasons for
this turn of events are much disputed. The crux, however, seems to have been
Kierkegaard’s sense of his inability to ‘reveal’ himself as civic life, and in
particular the life of a husband and father, required. By November, soon after the
defence of his thesis, the break had become final and Kierkegaard was on his
way to Berlin, the first of four visits which were his only journeys outside
Denmark. It was from this first visit, ostensibly for the purpose of attending
Schelling’s lectures, that Kierkegaard brought back the manuscripts containing
Judge Vilhelm’s defence of romantic love and marriage.
The publication of Either/Or in February 1843 was followed in October by
two slimmer volumes, Repetition and Fear and Trembling (both mostly written
on a second visit to Berlin not long after the publication of Either/Or). All these
works deal with the problem of entering society (or ‘realizing the universal’, an
expression introduced by Vilhelm). The same theme was pursued in the
substantial Stages on Life’s Way, published in April 1845, though now with a
distinctive religious aspect more in evidence. But almost a year previously, in
June 1844, there had appeared two books introducing new topics. Philosophical
Fragments sought, in subtle and spare language, to offer a Christian alternative
to Hegelian philosophy, though without mentioning the latter. The theme was
elaborated more explicitly, at great length, and with much irony and humour,
almost two years later in Concluding Unscientific Postscript to the Philosophical
Fragments. Within a few days of Philosophical Fragments, however, there had
also appeared The Concept of Dread (alternatively ‘The Concept of Anxiety’),
an examination of the psychological background to the experience of sin.
Alongside this already impressive production, Kierkegaard also published
twenty-one ‘edifying’ and ‘Christian’ discourses under his own name, some of
them published on the same days as works under pseudonyms.
As its title shows, Concluding Unscientific Postscript was supposed to mark
the end of Kierkegaard’s work as a writer. A few days before the manuscript was
delivered to the printer, Kierkegaard provoked a feud with a satiric weekly called
Corsair (Corsaren). In a volume of essays by a well-known literary figure and
aesthete, P. L. Møller, he had chanced upon a biting criticism of his own latest
work at the time, Stages on Life’s Way. Not altogether coincidentally, Møller was
the reputed model for Johannes, the pseudonymous author of ‘The Seducer’s
Diary’. Kierkegaard, who knew that Møller sustained a connection with Corsair
which he nevertheless wished to keep secret so as not to spoil his prospects for a
Chair at the University, divulged the connection in a newspaper article under a
pseudonym from the work criticized, at the same time wondering why the
pseudonyms had been singled out for the dubious honour of being spared
Corsair’s abuse. Corsair’s response was immediate. The weekly began
mercilessly to pillory, not the pseudonyms, but Kierkegaard in person. Three
weeks before Postscript was to be published, and while the Corsair business was
at its height, Kierkegaard wrote in his Journal that he felt his time as an author
was over, and even before the feud it appears he had given thought once more to
the priesthood. There remained only one more literary chore: the proof-reading
of a review of a book called Two Ages, a review in which he may have felt that
he had properly rounded off his work by spelling out its social and political
implications.
By the beginning of the following year, however, Kierkegaard was dismissing
these plans as a lapse of nerve and the author was again in full spate. The same
year (1847) he published Edifying Discourses in Different Spirits and the
substantial Works of Love, followed in the spring of 1848 by Christian
Discourses and in 1849 by The Lilies of the Field and the Birds of the Air and
Three Discourses at Communion on Fridays. There then followed two works
under a new pseudonym, Anti-Climacus: The Sickness unto Death and Practice
in Christianity.
These later works display a new stringency. Perhaps the Corsair affair, which
left Kierkegaard an object of public ridicule, enforced a polarization between
him and his society. His own suffering for truth was set off against the
complacency of a bourgeois public which manifested its self-contentment not
least in the manner of its religious observances, and whose religious leaders,
formerly close associates of Kierkegaard and friends of his family, struck him as
exemplars of self-seeking worldliness. Thus, in a way, the social and political
criticism that emerged in what might have been Kierkegaard’s final work, the
review of Two Ages, was a seed that developed in the atmosphere created by the
feud with Corsair to become a general condemnation of the age in which he
lived. The Sickness unto Death diagnoses the problem as despair, but as the
preface to that work says, this time as the sickness and not, as Vilhelm has it in
Either/Or, the remedy.
*
In the next few years Kierkegaard wrote little until he unleashed a vitriolic
attack on the State Church, which he now saw clearly as the real root and bastion
of spiritual complacency and compromise. During these years he lived in
increasingly straitened circumstances, and the remainder of his inheritance and
the modest proceeds of his authorship went to financing the final assault,
amongst other things through the publication of his own broadsheet, The Instant.
This went through nine issues before Kierkegaard fell ill, collapsed in the street,
and died in hospital some six weeks later, probably of a lung infection. He was
forty-two years old. On his sickbed he confided to Emil Boesen, his friend from
boyhood, indeed by that time his only friend, now a pastor and the only member
of the Church he would see (including his own brother), that his life had been a
‘great and to others unknown and incomprehensible suffering’, which looked
like ‘pride and vanity’ but ‘wasn’t’. Kierkegaard regretted he hadn’t married and
taken on an official position. His funeral was the occasion of what may have
been one of the first student demonstrations, led by his nephew, an early
supporter, who protested at the Church’s insistence on officiating at the
committal proceedings, contrary to the deceased’s wishes.
We remarked earlier that since Either/Or was an early work we might ask
ourselves what Kierkegaard thought about it later. But it was also suggested that
this question could quite properly be ignored. Once a literary or a philosophical
work has been launched on the world, readers are no more obliged to concern
themselves with than to share in whatever embarrassments it may have caused
its author. On the other hand, Kierkegaard’s deathbed regrets about not having
married or occupied an official position kindle one’s curiosity. And we still don’t
really know what Kierkegaard ever thought of Vilhelm. Our comments here,
now that we are focusing on the author and not the work, can be treated initially
as nothing but an appendix to the biography.
One question relates to selfhood. In a note from the year Either/Or was
published, Kierkegaard tells us that the reason Part Two begins with a defence of
marriage is that marriage is life’s ‘deepest form of revelation’.
* Might then the
later Kierkegaard wish to allow that emerging from the cover of his pseudonyms
to conduct a public campaign against the established Church also counted as a
form of revelation? Or does his regret at not having married amount to a belief
that he remained incompletely revealed and therefore that he failed to attain true
selfhood? On the other hand, the later pseudonym Anti-Climacus added a direct
God-relationship to Vilhelm’s specification of selfhood. So here Kierkegaard
may have felt he had the better of Vilhelm in spite of conspicuously failing to
live up to the latter’s ideal of the ethical. Much of Kierkegaard’s working life
was spent worrying whether what it accomplished justified his being an
‘exception’. One way of putting the problem would be to ask whether there was
a ‘selfhood’ reserved for martyrs. The deeper question would then be whether he
deserved that status. One way of construing the Corsair affair is to see it as an
attempt to hasten the necessary trial by ordeal before it was too late to run the
course.
There is also the problem of Vilhelm’s portrayal of the relation between the
sexes in marriage, and whether the limitations in it so apparent to us today are
expressions of Kierkegaard’s own views at the time and if so whether these ever
changed. The year before his death he wrote that what Vilhelm says about ‘the
woman’ is ‘what you could expect from a husband defending marriage with
ethical enthusiasm’. Kierkegaard seems to suggest the ethical enthusiasm is
somehow false. He says that although man has a lust for life, left to himself he
finds no way to awaken it. When the woman, however, in whom this lust is
already alive, appears before him she awakens his ‘unspecified’ lust and
specifies it.
* So Vilhelm’s marriage is really no more than an expression of his
own shortcomings and needs, and Vilhelm himself really as much of an egoist as
his friend the aesthete. So far so good, but this is where Kierkegaard stops. Or
rather, he says that man is constitutionally ‘spirit’, which as readers of The
Sickness unto Death will recognize, means that he is fated to exercise what was
referred to here earlier as the human ability to ask what it is essentially to be a
human being. Two things follow: first that the exercise of this ability deprives
man of his lust for life, and second, that the only way for him to supplement this
loss is for woman to lack this peculiarly human ability. An unholy combination
if ever there was one: Vilhelm’s stolid chauvinism gives way to a cynical
symbiotitism. Does Kierkegaard have any better defence of marriage to offer
than that of an enthusiastic ethicist?
Our motto, the reader will recall, has Kierkegaard using his either/or to drive
out mediocrity and ‘spiritlessness’, along with the pagan optimism which made
Christianity just one more item on the agenda of finitude. Here the either/or
makes a clear separation between the finite life we lead, and would like to have a
lust for, and the world of spirit for which life as we generally lead it is trivial and
not lustworthy. ‘Drop all this egoistic trifling which people usually fill their lives
with, doing business, marrying, begetting children, being something in the
world; drop it, cut it all out – let your life be dedicated to loving God and
devotion to humanity …’
† The 1854 either/or spans an unbridgeable divide
between petty bourgeois self-seeking and a life of unspecified self-effacement on
behalf of the Good. Just where the things Vilhelm prizes find a place in a world
defined by these stark alternatives is unclear, as indeed what it could be about
them that gave us any sense of their value. The appeal of our 1841–2 either/or is
that its ‘either’ is precisely not a life of mediocrity or spiritlessness. How
Kierkegaard could have handled a spiritless life-view poetically is hard to
conceive anyway. Such a life has no appeal. Nor does it lead anywhere. An
aesthetic ‘either’ is one that its ‘or’ can sympathize with because that is where it
can have come from; and it has the imagination and depth needed to grasp the
force of appeals made to it to choose the ‘or’.
PART ONE
CONTAINING THE PAPERS OF A
Are passions, then, the pagans of the soul?
Reason alone baptized?
Edward Young
1
PREFACE
PERHAPS it has sometimes occurred to you, dear reader, to doubt the correctness
of the familiar philosophical proposition that the outward is the inward, the
inward the outward.
2 You yourself have perhaps nursed a secret which, in its joy
or pain, you felt was too precious for you to be able to initiate others into it. Your
life has perhaps brought you into touch with people of whom you suspected
something of the kind, yet without being able to wrest their secret from them by
force or guile. Perhaps neither case applies to you and your life, and yet you are
not a stranger to that doubt; it has slipped before your mind now and then like a
fleeting shadow. Such a doubt comes and goes, and no one knows where it
comes from or to where it hurries on. I, for my part, have always been of a
somewhat heretical temper on this point of philosophy and have therefore early
accustomed myself to undertaking, as best I may, observations and investigations
of my own; I have sought guidance from the authors whose views in this respect
I shared; in short, I have done everything in my power to fill the gap left by the
philosophical literature.
Little by little, hearing became my favourite sense; for just as it is the voice
that reveals the inwardness which is incommensurable with the outer, so the ear
is the instrument whereby that inwardness is grasped, hearing the sense by which
it is appropriated. Whenever I found a contradiction between what I saw and
what I heard, I found my doubt corroborated, and my passion for observation
increased. A father-confessor is separated from the penitent by a grille; he does
not see, he only hears. Gradually, as he listens, he forms a corresponding
exterior. Consequently, he avoids contradiction. It is otherwise, however, when
you see and hear at the same time, and yet perceive a grille between yourself and
the speaker. As far as results go, my observational efforts in this direction have
met with very varied success. Sometimes I have had fortune with me, sometimes
not, and any returns along this road always depend on good fortune. However, I
have never lost the desire to continue my investigations. Whenever I have been
on the point of ruing my perseverance, my efforts have been crowned by an
unexpected stroke of luck. It was an unexpected stroke of good luck of this kind
that, in a most curious way, put me in possession of the papers I hereby have the
honour of presenting to the reading public. These papers have given me the
opportunity to gain an insight into the lives of two men which corroborated my
suspicion that the outward was not, after all, the inward. This applies particularly
to one of them. His exterior has been in complete contradiction to his interior. To
some extent it is also true of the other inasmuch as he concealed a rather
significant interior beneath a somewhat ordinary exterior.
Still, for the record I had better explain how these papers came into my
possession. It is now about seven years since, at a second-hand dealer’s here in
town, I noticed an escritoire. It caught my attention the moment I saw it; it was
not of modern workmanship and rather well used, yet it captivated me. I cannot
possibly explain the reason for this impression, but most people have
experienced something similar in their lives. My daily path took me past the
dealer and his escritoire, and never a day passed but I fastened my eyes on it as I
went by. Gradually that escritoire acquired a history for me; seeing it became a
necessity for me, and to that end I thought nothing of going out of my way for its
sake when an unaccustomed route called for that. The more I saw it the more I
wanted to possess it. I was quite aware that this was a curious desire, seeing I
had no use for this piece of furniture, that procuring it was an extravagance on
my part. Yet, as we all know, desire is very sophistical. I found some pretext for
going into the dealer’s, asked about other things, and as I was about to leave,
casually made a very low offer for the escritoire. I thought the dealer might
possibly have accepted. Then it would have fallen into my hands by chance.
Certainly it wasn’t for the sake of the money that I behaved in this way, but for
the sake of my conscience. The plan failed. The dealer was uncommonly firm.
For some time again I went by every day, and looked with loving eyes upon my
escritoire. ‘You must make up your mind,’ I thought, ‘for suppose it is sold, then
it’s too late. Even if you succeeded in getting hold of it again, you would never
have the same feeling for it.’ My heart pounded when I went into the dealer’s. It
was bought and paid for. ‘This has to be the last time,’ I thought, ‘that you are so
extravagant. Yes, in fact it is lucky you have bought it, for every time you look at
it you will think how extravagant you were. With the escritoire a new period of
your life is to begin.’ Alas, desire is very eloquent and good resolutions are
always at hand!
So the escritoire was set up in my apartment, and as my pleasure in the first
period of my enamourment had been to look upon it from the street, so now I
walked by it at home. Gradually I became familiar with all its rich content, its
many drawers and recesses, and I was pleased in every way with the escritoire.
But it was not to remain thus. In the summer of 1836 my affairs permitted me a
week’s trip to the country. The postilion was ordered for five o’clock in the
morning. The luggage I needed had been packed the evening before; everything
was prepared. I awoke at four, but the picture of the beautiful district I was to
visit had such an intoxicating effect upon me that I fell asleep again, or to
dreaming. It seems my servant thought he should allow me all the sleep I could
get, for it was not until half-past five that he called me. The postilion was
already blowing his horn, and although I am not usually inclined to follow the
orders of others I have nevertheless always made an exception of the postilion
and his evocative leitmotif. I was speedily dressed. I was already at the door
when it occurred to me, ‘Have you enough money in your pocket-book?’ There
wasn’t much. I unlocked the escritoire to pull out my money drawer and take
with me what the house could afford. What do you think! The drawer wouldn’t
budge. All expedients were in vain. It was all as unfortunate as could be. To
stumble just at that moment, when my ears were still ringing with the postilion’s
inviting tones, on such difficulties! The blood rose to my head, I became
indignant. As Xerxes had the sea whipped, I resolved to take a terrible revenge.
3
A hatchet was fetched. With it I dealt the escritoire a tremendous blow. Whether
in my wrath I missed or the drawer was as obstinate as I, the effect was not the
one intended. The drawer was closed and the drawer remained closed. But
something else happened. Whether my blow fell just on that point, or the overall
shock to the whole framework of the escritoire was what did it, I don’t know; but
what I do know is that there sprang open a secret door which I had never noticed
before. This enclosed a recess which naturally I hadn’t discovered either. Here to
my great surprise I found a mass of papers, the papers that form the content of
the present work. My resolve remained unaltered. At the first station I would
take out a loan. In the greatest haste a mahogany case in which there usually lay
a pair of pistols was emptied and the papers placed in it. Pleasure had triumphed
and gained an unexpected increase. In my heart I begged the escritoire
forgiveness for the harsh treatment, while my mind found its doubt corroborated
– that the outward after all is not the inward, and my empirical proposition
confirmed – that luck is needed to make such discoveries.
I arrived at Hillerød in the middle of the forenoon, put my finances in order,
and let the magnificent countryside make its general impact. Immediately the
following morning I began my excursions, which now took on a quite other
character than I had intended. My servant followed me with the mahogany case.
I sought out a romantic spot in the forest where I was as safe as possible from
surprise and then took out the documents. My host, who was not unaware of
these frequent peregrinations with the mahogany case, ventured the remark that I
was perhaps practising at shooting with my pistols. For this remark I was much
obliged to him and left him undisturbed in his belief.
A cursory glance at the new-found papers immediately revealed that they
formed two œuvres which differed markedly also in externals. One of them was
written on a kind of letter-vellum in quarto, with a fairly wide margin. The
handwriting was legible, sometimes even a little elegant, just once in a while
careless. The other was written on full sheets of foolscap divided into columns,
in the way that legal documents and the like are written. The handwriting was
clear, rather extended, uniform, and even; it looked as though it belonged to a
businessman. The contents, too, proved straightaway to be dissimilar. The one
part contained a number of aesthetic essays of varying length, the other consisted
of two long inquiries and one shorter, all ethical in content, as it seemed, and in
the form of letters. On closer examination this difference proved fully
corroborated, for the latter compilation consisted of letters written to the author
of the first.
But I must find some briefer way of designating the two authors. To that end I
have scrutinized the papers very carefully but have found nothing, or as good as
nothing. Regarding the first author, the aestheticist, there is no information at all.
As for the other, the letter-writer, one learns that he was called Vilhelm, had been
a judge, but of what court is not specified. If I were to go strictly by the
historical facts and call him Vilhelm I would lack a corresponding appellation
for the first author and have to give him some arbitrary name. I have therefore
preferred to call the first author A, the second B.
In addition to the longer essays there were, among the papers, some slips on
which were written aphorisms, lyrical effusions, reflections. The handwriting
alone indicated that they belonged to A. The contents confirmed this.
The papers themselves I then tried to arrange as best I could. With B’s papers
that was fairly easily done. One of the letters presupposes the other. In the
second letter there is a quotation from the first. The third letter presupposes the
two previous ones.
Arranging A’s papers was not such an easy matter. I have therefore let chance
determine the order, that is to say, I have left them in the order in which I found
them, of course without being able to decide whether this order has any
chronological value or notional significance. The scraps of paper lay loose in the
hiding-place; these I have had to assign a place. I have let them come first
because I thought they could best be regarded as preliminary glimpses of what
the longer essays develop more connectedly. I have called them ‘Diapsalmata’,
4
and added as a kind of motto ‘ad se ipsum’.
5 This title and this motto are in a
way mine and yet not mine. They are mine in so far as they apply to the whole
collection; on the other hand they belong to A himself, for the word
‘Diapsalmata’ was written on one of the scraps, and on two of them the words
‘ad se ipsum’. Also a little French verse, which appeared above one of the
aphorisms, I have had printed on the reverse of the title page, in a way A himself
has frequently done. Since the majority of these aphorisms have a lyrical
character, I have thought it quite suitable to use the word ‘Diapsalma’ in the
main title. If the reader should think this infelicitous, then truth demands that I
acknowledge it as my own invention and affirm that it was surely good taste on
A’s part to use it for the aphorism over which it was found. In the arrangement of
the individual aphorisms I have let chance prevail. That the individual
expressions often contradict one another I found quite in order, for it belongs
essentially to the mood. I did not find it worth the trouble adopting an
arrangement that made these contradictions less conspicuous. I followed chance,
and it is also chance that has drawn my attention to the fact that the first and the
last aphorism in a way correspond to one another, in that the one as it were
reverberates with the pain of being a poet, while the other savours the
satisfaction of always having the laughter on one’s side.
As for A’s aesthetic essays, I have nothing to remark in their regard. They were
all ready for printing. And so far as they contain difficulties I must let these
speak for themselves. […]
The last of A’s papers is a story entitled ‘The Seducer’s Diary’. Here there are
new difficulties, since A does not acknowledge himself as its author, but only as
editor. This is an old short-story writer’s trick, to which I should not object
further did it not contribute to making my own position so complicated, because
it presents the one author as lying inside the other, as in a Chinese-box puzzle.
Here is not the place to go further into what confirms me in my opinion; I shall
only note that the dominant mood of A’s preface in a way betrays the writer. It is
really as if A himself had become afraid of his work which, like a restless dream,
still continued to frighten him while it was being told. If these were actual events
to which he had been witness, it seems strange that the preface bears no stamp of
A’s joy at seeing the realization of the idea that had often hovered before his
mind. This idea of the seducer’s is suggested in the essay on the ‘Immediate
Erotic’ as well as in ‘Shadowgraphs’, namely the idea that the analogue of Don
Juan must be a reflected seducer who works within the category of the
interesting, where the thing is therefore not how many he seduces but how he
does it. I find no trace of such a joy in the preface but rather, as noted, a
trembling, a certain horror, which is no doubt due to his poetical relation to this
idea. Nor does it surprise me that it has affected A in this way; for I, too, who
have nothing at all to do with this tale and am indeed twice removed from the
original author, even I have at times felt quite uncomfortable while busying
myself with these papers in the still of the night. It was as if the seducer moved
like a shadow over my floor, as if he threw a glance at the papers, as if he
fastened his demonic eye on me and said, ‘So, you mean to publish my papers!
That is in any case indefensible of you; you will cause anxiety in the little dears.
But then, of course, you think in return to make me and my sort harmless. There
you are wrong. I shall simply change my method and then I am even better
placed. What flocks of young girls will run straight into my arms when they hear
that seductive name, “a seducer”! Give me half a year and I shall provide a story
more interesting than everything I have experienced up to now. I imagine a
young, vigorous girl with a sharp turn of mind getting the remarkable idea of
avenging her sex on me. She thinks she can coerce me, give me a taste of the
pangs of unrequited love. That’s a girl for me. If she doesn’t make a good
enough job of it herself, I shall come to her aid. I shall writhe like the Mols
people’s eel.
6 And when I have brought her to that point, she is mine.’
But perhaps I have abused my position already as editor by burdening the
readers with my reflections. The occasion must speak for my pardon, for it was
on the occasion of the awkwardness of my position due to A’s presenting himself
only as editor of this story, and not as author, that I let myself be carried away.
What more I have to add about this story I can only do in my capacity as
editor. For I believe I can find in it some clue to the time of its action. Here and
there in the diary is a date; what is missing is the year. That makes it look as
though I should get no further. However, by examining the individual dates more
closely I think I have found a clue. For although every year has a seventh of
April, a third of July, a second of August, etc., it by no means follows that the
seventh of April falls each year on a Monday. So I calculated accordingly and
discovered that this combination fits the year 1834.
7 Whether A has thought of
that I cannot determine; I hardly believe so, for otherwise he would surely not
have employed as much caution as is his custom. Nor does the diary read
‘Monday, April 7th’, etc., it says simply ‘April 7th’. Indeed the entry itself for
that date begins, ‘On Monday, then’, which precisely points your mind in the
wrong direction; but reading through the entry under that date, one sees that it
must have been a Monday. In the case of this story, then, I have a definite date.
But all attempts I have made until now with its help to determine the times of the
other essays have been unsuccessful. I could just as well have placed this story
third, but, as I said above, I have preferred to let chance prevail and everything
remains in the order in which I found it.
As for B’s papers, these fall easily and naturally into place. In their case,
however, I have made an alteration inasmuch as I have allowed myself to furnish
them with titles, seeing the letter-form has prevented the author himself from
giving these inquiries a title. Should the reader, therefore, having become
acquainted with the contents, find that the titles were not happily chosen, I am
always willing to reconcile myself to the pain attached to doing badly what one
wanted to do well. […]
As for B’s manuscript, there I have permitted myself absolutely no changes but
have looked upon it scrupulously as a document. I might perhaps have removed
the occasional carelessness, which is understandable enough when one considers
that he is only a letter-writer. I didn’t want to do that, because I was afraid I
might go too far. […]
The point I have now arrived at is the one I had already reached five years ago.
I had arranged the papers in their present order, had made up my mind to publish
them, but then thought it best after all to wait a while. I considered five years to
be an appropriate space of time. Those five years have now elapsed and I am
beginning where I left off. Presumably it is unnecessary to reassure the reader
that I have left no stone unturned in my efforts to trace the authors. The dealer
kept no books. As everyone knows, the practice is rare among second-hand
dealers. He did not know from whom he had bought that piece; he seemed to
recall that it had been purchased at a general auction. I shall not venture to
narrate to the reader the many fruitless attempts that have consumed so much of
my time, the less so seeing their recollection is so unpleasant to myself. I can at
least in all brevity let the reader in on the result, for the result was absolutely nil.
As I was about to carry out my resolve to publish the papers, a single
misgiving awoke in me. The reader will perhaps permit me to speak quite
frankly. It struck me that I might be guilty of an indiscretion towards the
unknown authors. However, the more familiar I became with the papers, the
more that misgiving diminished. The papers were of such a nature that, for all
my painstaking investigations, they yielded no information. So much less likely
in that case that a reader should find any, since I dare measure myself with any
reader, not indeed in taste and sympathy and insight, but in industry and
tirelessness. Assuming therefore that the unknown authors still existed, that they
lived here in town, that they came to make this unexpected acquaintance with
their works, then, if they themselves remained silent nothing would come of
their publication, for it is true in the strictest sense of these papers what one
usually says anyway of all printed matter – they hold their peace.
One other misgiving I had was in itself of less importance, fairly easy to
dispel, and has indeed been overcome even more easily than I had thought. It
occurred to me that these papers might become a financial proposition. Although
it seemed proper that I should receive a small fee for my troubles as editor, an
author’s fee I had to consider much too excessive. As the honest Scottish farmers
in The White Lady
8 decide to buy the estate, cultivate it, and then make a present
of it to the Counts of Avenel should they ever return, I decided to place the entire
fee at interest, so that if the authors should ever turn up I would be able to give
them the whole thing with compound interest. If my complete ineptitude has not
already convinced the reader that I am no author or scholar who makes
publishing his profession, then the naivety of this reasoning should put the
matter beyond all doubt. This misgiving was also overcome in a much easier
way, since in Denmark even an author’s fee is no manor-house, and the unknown
authors would have had to stay away for a long time for their fee, even with
compound interest, to become a financial proposition.
There remained merely to give these papers a title. I could have called them
‘Papers’, ‘Posthumous Papers’, ‘Found Papers’, ‘Lost Papers’, etc.; there are
many and various possibilities, as we all know. But none of these titles satisfied
me. In deciding on a title I have therefore allowed myself a liberty, a deception,
which I shall endeavour to answer for. During my constant occupation with these
papers it dawned upon me that they could yield a new aspect if regarded as the
work of one man. I am quite aware of all that can be objected to in this view, that
it is unhistorical, improbable, preposterous that one person should be the author
of both parts, notwithstanding the reader might well fall for the conceit that once
you have said A you must also say B. However, I have still been unable to give
up the idea. Then it would have been someone who had lived through both kinds
of experience, or had deliberated on both. For A’s papers contain a variety of
attempts at an aesthetic view of life; to convey a unified aesthetic life-view is
scarcely possible. B’s papers contain an ethical life-view. As I let this thought
influence my soul, it became clear to me that I might let this guide me into
determining the title. This is just what the title I have chosen expresses. If there
be any loss in this to the reader, it cannot be much, for he can just as well forget
the title while reading the book. Once he has read it he may perhaps then think
of the tide. Doing so will free him from every finite question as to whether A
was actually persuaded and repented, whether B won the day, or whether,
perhaps, it ended by B’s going over to A’s point of view. For in this respect these
papers are without an ending. If one thinks this isn’t as it should be, it would be
unwarranted to say it was mistaken, for one might just as well call it unfortunate.
I, for my part, consider it a piece of good fortune. One occasionally comes
across novelettes where opposite life-views are expressed through particular
persons. It usually ends with one of them convincing the other; rather than
insisting on the view’s speaking for itself, the reader is enriched with the
historical result that the other party was convinced. I consider it a piece of good
fortune that these papers provide no information in that regard. Whether A wrote
his aesthetic essays after receiving B’s letters, whether his soul has continued
since then to riot in wild abandon or has calmed down, of this I cannot see
myself in a position to pass on a single piece of information since the papers
contain none. Nor do they contain any clues as to how things have gone with B,
whether he had the strength to stick to his view or not. Once the book has been
read, A and B are forgotten; only the views confront each other and await no
final decision in particular persons.
I have no further comment to make except that it has occurred to me that the
honourable authors, if they were aware of my project, might possibly wish to
accompany their papers with a word to the reader. I shall therefore add a few
words under their hands’ guidance. A would surely have no objection to the
publication of the papers; to the reader he would presumably cry out, ‘Read them
or don’t read them, you will regret both.’ It is harder to determine what B would
say. He might perhaps direct one or another reproach at me, especially regarding
the publication of A’s papers. He would let me feel that he himself had no part in
it, that he could wash his hands of it. Having done that he might perhaps turn to
the book with these words: ‘Go out into the world, then; avoid if possible the
attention of the critics, call on a single reader in a favourable moment, and
should you stumble upon a lady reader, I would say: “My fair reader, in this
book you will find something you ought perhaps not to know, and something
else you might well profit from knowing; so read the first something in such a
way that you who have read it can be as though one who has not read it, the
other in such a way that you who have read it can be as though one who has not
forgotten what has been read.”’
9 As editor I will only append the wish that the
book meets the reader in a favourable hour, and that the fair lady reader succeeds
in scrupulously following B’s well-intentioned advice.
November 1842 THE EDITOR
1 DIAPSALMATA
ad se ipsum
Grandeur, savoir, renommé,
Amitié, plaisir et bien,
Tout n’est que vent, que fumée:
Pour mieux dire, tout n’est rien.
1
WHAT is a poet? An unhappy man who hides deep anguish in his heart, but
whose lips are so formed that when the sigh and cry pass through them, it sounds
like lovely music. His fate is like that of those unfortunates who were slowly
tortured by a gentle fire in Phalaris’s bull; their cries could not reach the tyrant’s
ears to cause him dismay, to him they sounded like sweet music.
2 And people
flock around the poet and say: ‘Sing again soon’ – that is, ‘May new sufferings
torment your soul but your lips be fashioned as before, for the cry would only
frighten us, but the music, that is blissful.’ And the critics come forward and say:
‘That’s the way, that’s how the rules of aesthetics say it should be done.’ Of
course, a critic resembles a poet to a hair, except he has no anguish in his heart,
no music on his lips. So I tell you, I would rather be a swineherd at Amagerbro
and be understood by the swine than a poet and misunderstood by people. […]
I prefer talking with children, with them one can still hope they may become
rational beings; but those who have become that – Lord save us!
Aren’t people absurd! They never use the freedoms they do have but demand
those they don’t have; they have freedom of thought, they demand freedom of
speech.
I can’t be bothered. I can’t be bothered to ride, the motion is too violent; I can’t
be bothered to walk, it’s strenuous; I can’t be bothered to lie down, for either I’d
have to stay lying down and that I can’t be bothered with, or I’d have to get up
again, and I can’t be bothered with that either. In short: I just can’t be bothered.
As everyone knows, there are insects which die in the moment of fertilization.
Thus it is with all joy, life’s supreme and most voluptuous moment of pleasure is
attended by death. […]
This is the main defect with everything human, that it is only through
opposition that the object of desire is possessed. I shan’t speak of the various
syndromes that can keep the psychologist busy (the melancholic has the bestdeveloped sense of humour, the most extravagant person is often the one most
prone to the picturesque, the dissolute one often the most moral, the doubter
often the most religious), but simply recall that it is through sin that one first
catches sight of salvation.
Besides my other numerous circle of acquaintances I have one more intimate
confidant – my melancholy. In the midst of my joy, in the midst of my work, he
waves to me, calls me to one side, even though physically I stay put. My
melancholy is the most faithful mistress I have known; what wonder, then, that I
love her in return. […]
Old age realizes the dreams of youth; look at Swift: in his youth he built an
asylum, in his old age he himself entered it.
3
It should worry one to see with what hypochondriac profundity a former
generation of Englishmen have discovered the ambiguity at the bottom of
laughter. Thus Dr Hartley
4 has remarked: ‘When laughter first manifests itself in
the infant, it is an incipient cry, excited by pain, or by a feeling of pain suddenly
inhibited, and recurring at brief intervals.’ What if everything in the world were a
misunderstanding, what if laughter were really tears?
There are times when one can be so infinitely pained on seeing someone all
alone in the world. Thus the other day I saw a poor girl walking all alone to
church to be confirmed. […]
I say of my sorrow what the Englishman says of his home: my sorrow is my
castle. Many consider sorrow one of life’s comforts.
I feel as a chessman must when the opponent says of it: that piece cannot be
moved. […]
I’m stunted as a sheva, weak and unaspirated as a dagesh lene,
5
I feel like a
letter written back-to-front in the line, yet rampant as a three-tailed pasha,
6
jealous of myself and my thoughts as the bank is of its printing plates, and
generally as self-reflected as any reflexive pronoun. If only it went with
misfortune and sorrow as with conscious good deeds, where those who do them
have their reward ‘taken away’.
7
If that were true of sorrows, I’d be the happiest
of men; for I take all my troubles in advance and still they all stay behind.
The tremendous poetic power of folk literature finds expression in, among
other ways, its having the strength to desire. Compared to it, the desire of our
own time is both sinful and boring because what it covets is the neighbour’s.
That other desire knows very well that the neighbour no more than itself has
what it seeks. And when its desire is sinful it is on such a titanic scale as to make
man tremble. It won’t let its price be beaten down by the cold probabilities of a
sober reason. Don Juan still strides over the stage with his 1,003 mistresses. Out
of deference to the tradition no one dares smile. If a writer ventured the like in
our own time he would be ridiculed. […]
Alas, the door of fortune does not open inwards so that one can force it by
charging at it; it opens outwards and so there is nothing one can do.
I think I have the courage to doubt everything; I think I have the courage to
fight everything. But I do not have the courage to know anything, nor to possess,
to own anything. Most people complain that the world is so prosaic, that life
isn’t like a romantic novel where opportunities are always so favourable. What I
complain of is that life is not like a novel where there are hard-hearted fathers,
and goblins and trolls to fight with, enchanted princesses to free. What are all
such enemies taken together compared to the pallid, bloodless, glutinous
nocturnal shapes with which I fight and to which I myself give life and being.
How barren is my soul and thought, and yet incessantly tormented by vacuous,
rapturous and agonizing birth pangs! Is my spirit to be forever tongue-tied? Must
I always babble? What I need is a voice as penetrating as the glance of Lynceus,
terrifying as the sigh of the giants, persistent as a sound of nature, mocking as a
frost-chilled gust of wind, malicious as Echo’s callous scorn,
8 with a compass
from the deepest bass to the most melting chest-notes, modulating from the
whisper of gentle holiness to the violent fury of rage. That is what I need to get
air, to give expression to what is on my mind, to stir the bowels of my wrath and
of my sympathy. – But my voice is only hoarse like the cry of a gull, or dying
away like the blessing upon the lips of the dumb.
What is to come? What does the future hold? I don’t know, I have no idea.
When from a fixed point a spider plunges down as is its nature, it sees always
before it an empty space in which it cannot find a footing however much it
flounders. That is how it is with me: always an empty space before me, what
drives me on is a result that lies behind me. This life is back-to-front and terrible,
unendurable.
After all, it is the best time of one’s life, the first period of falling in love, when
with every meeting, every glance, one brings home something new to rejoice
over.
My reflection on life altogether lacks meaning. I take it some evil spirit has put
a pair of spectacles on my nose, one glass of which magnifies to an enormous
degree, while the other reduces to the same degree. […]
Of all ridiculous things in the world what strikes me as the most ridiculous of
all is being busy in the world, to be a man quick to his meals and quick to his
work. So when, at the crucial moment, I see a fly settle on such a businessman’s
nose, or he is bespattered by a carriage which passes him by in even greater
haste, or the drawbridge is raised, or a tile falls from the roof and strikes him
dead, I laugh from the bottom of my heart. And who could help laughing? For
what do they achieve, these busy botchers? Are they not like the housewife who,
in confusion at the fire in her house, saved the fire-tongs? What else do they
salvage from the great fire of life?
I lack altogether patience to live. I cannot see the grass grow, but since I cannot
I don’t feel at all inclined to. My views are the fleeting observations of a
‘travelling scholar’
9
rushing through life in the greatest haste. People say the
good Lord fills the stomach before the eyes. I haven’t noticed; my eyes have had
enough and I am weary of everything, and yet I hunger.
Ask any questions you will, just don’t ask me for reasons. A young girl is
excused for not being able to give reasons, they say she lives in her feelings. It is
different with me. Generally, I have so many and usually mutually contradictory
reasons that, for that reason, it is impossible for me to give reasons. Also cause
and effect don’t seem to hang properly together. At one time huge and powerful
causes give rise to tiny and unimpressive little effects, occasionally to none at
all; at another a brisk little cause gives birth to a colossal effect. […]
Life has become a bitter drink to me, and yet it must be taken in drops, counted
one by one.
No one comes back from the dead, no one has entered the world without
crying; no one is asked when he wishes to enter life, nor when he wishes to
leave.
Time passes, life is a stream, people say, and so on. I haven’t noticed it. Time
stands still and I with it. All the plans I form fly straight back at me, when I want
to spit in my own face.
When I get up in the morning I go straight back to bed again. I feel best in the
evening, the moment I dowse the candle, pull the eiderdown over my head. I
raise myself up once more, look about the room with an indescribable peace of
mind, and then it’s goodnight, down under the eiderdown.
What am I good for? For nothing or everything. That is an unusual capability. I
wonder if the world will appreciate it? God knows if the girls get jobs who look
for positions as maids-of-all-work or, failing that, as anything at all.
One should be an enigma not just to others but to oneself too. I study myself.
When I’m tired of that I light a cigar to pass the time, and think: God only knows
what the good Lord really meant with me, or what He meant to make of me. […]
The sorcerer Virgil had himself chopped in pieces and placed in a cauldron to
be cooked for eight days, thus to become rejuvenated.
10 He had someone watch
out that no intruder peeped into the cauldron. The watchman was unable,
however, to resist the temptation. It was too soon. Virgil disappeared with a cry,
like a little child. I, too, have probably looked too early into the cauldron, into
the cauldron of life and its historical development, and no doubt will never
manage to be more than a child. […]
Let others complain that our age is evil; my complaint is that it is paltry. For it
is without passion. People’s thoughts are thin and flimsy as lace, they themselves
are as pitiable as lacemakers. The thoughts in their hearts are too paltry to be
sinful. For a worm it might be considered a sin to harbour such thoughts, but not
for the human being shaped in the image of God. Their desires are stodgy and
sluggish, their passions sleepy. They do their duty, these hucksters, but like the
Jews, they let themselves clip the coin just a little; they think that however well
the good Lord keeps His books, they can still get away with cheating Him a
little. Fie upon them! That’s why my soul always reverts to the Old Testament
and to Shakespeare. There at least one feels that it’s human beings talking. There
people hate, people love, people murder their enemy and curse his descendants
through all generations, there people sin.
I divide my time thus: half the time I sleep, the other half I dream. When I
sleep I never dream; that would be a pity, for sleeping is the height of genius.
Being a perfect human being is after all the highest goal. Now I have corns,
that’s always a help. […]
The best proof adduced of the wretchedness of life is that derived from
contemplating its glory.
Most people are in such a rush to enjoy themselves that they hurry right past it.
They are like the dwarf who kept guard over an abducted princess in his castle.
One day he took an after-dinner nap. When he woke up an hour later she was
gone. Quickly he pulled on his seven-league boots and with one step he had far
outstripped her.
My soul is so heavy that no longer can any thought sustain it, no wingbeat lift
it up into the ether. If it moves, it only sweeps along the ground like the low
flight of birds when a thunderstorm is brewing.
How empty life is and without meaning. – We bury a man, we follow him to
the grave, we throw three spades of earth on him, we ride out in a coach, we ride
home in a coach, we take comfort in the thought that a long life awaits us. But
how long is threescore years and ten? Why not finish it at once? Why not stay
out there and step down into the grave with him, and draw lots for who should
have the misfortune to be the last alive to throw the last three spades of earth on
the last of the dead? […]
Wretched fate! In vain you paint your furrowed face like an old harlot, in vain
you make a racket with your fool’s bells. You bore me, it’s always the same, an
idem per idem.
11 No variation, always a rehash. Come, sleep and death, you
promise nothing, you keep everything. […]
A fire broke out backstage in a theatre. The clown came out to warn the public;
they thought it was a joke and applauded. He repeated it; the acclaim was even
greater. I think that’s just how the world will come to an end: to general applause
from wits who believe it’s a joke.
Whatever can be the meaning of this life? If we divide mankind into two large
classes, we can say that one works for a living, the other has no need to. But
working for one’s living can’t be the meaning of life; to suppose that constantly
procuring the conditions of life should be the answer to the question of the
meaning of what they make possible is a contradiction. Usually the lives of the
other class have no meaning either, beyond that of consuming the said
conditions. To say that the meaning of life is to die seems again to be a
contradiction.
The real pleasure consists not in what one takes pleasure in but in the mind. If I
had in my service a humble spirit who, when I asked for a glass of water,
brought me all the world’s most expensive wines nicely blended in a goblet, I
would dismiss him until he learned that the pleasure consists not in what I enjoy
but in having my way.
So it isn’t I who am master of my life, I am just one of the threads to be woven
into life’s calico! Well then, even if I cannot spin, I can at least cut the thread in
two. […]
I seem destined to suffer every possible mood, to gain experience in all
directions. I lie every moment like a child learning how to swim, out in the
middle of the sea. I scream (which I have learned from the Greeks, from whom
one can learn what is purely human); for although I have a harness around my
waist, I cannot see the pole that is to hold me up. It is a fearful way to gain
experience.
It’s rather remarkable, one acquires a conception of the eternal from the two
most appalling opposites. If I think of that unhappy bookkeeper who lost his
mind in despair at ruining a merchant house through saying that seven and six
make fourteen; if I think of him repeating seven and six are fourteen to himself,
day in and day out, unmindful of all else, I have an image of eternity. – If I
imagine a voluptuously beautiful woman in a harem, reclining on a sofa in all
her allure, not caring for anything in the world, I have another image for eternity.
What the philosophers say about reality is often as deceptive as when you see a
sign in a second-hand store that reads: Pressing Done Here. If you went in with
your clothes to have them pressed you would be fooled; the sign is for sale.
For me nothing is more dangerous than recollection. Once I have recalled
some life-situation it ceases to exist. People say that separation helps to revive
love. That is quite true, but it revives it in a purely poetic way. A life in
recollection is the most perfect imaginable; memory gives you your fill more
abundantly than all of reality and has a security which no reality possesses. A
life-situation recalled has already passed into eternity and has no more temporal
interest.
If anyone should keep a diary it’s me, to aid my memory a little. After a while
it often happens that I completely forget what reasons motivated me to do this or
that, not just in bagatelles, but also in taking the most decisive steps. Should the
reason then occur to me, sometimes it seems so strange that I myself refuse to
believe it was the reason. This doubt would be removed if I had something
written to refer to. In any case a reason is a curious thing; if I concentrate all my
passion on it, it grows into a huge necessity that can move heaven and earth; if I
lack passion, I look down on it with scorn. – I have speculated for some time as
to the real reason why I resigned my post as secondary-school teacher. Thinking
it over now, it occurs to me that such a position was the very thing for me. Today
it dawned on me: that was precisely the reason, I had to consider myself
absolutely fitted for the job. So if I’d continued in it I had everything to lose,
nothing to gain. Wherefore I thought it proper to resign my post and seek
employment with a travelling theatre, the reason being that I had no talent, and
so everything to gain. […]
The social striving and the exquisite sympathy that goes with it, is becoming
more and more widespread. In Leipzig a committee has been formed which, out
of sympathy for the sad end of old horses, has decided to eat them.
I have only one friend, Echo. And why is Echo my friend? Because I love my
sorrow, and Echo does not take it away from me. I have only one confidant, the
silence of the night. And why is it my confidant? Because it is silent.
As it happened to Parmeniscus in the legend, who in the cave of Trophonius
lost the ability to laugh but got it back on Delos at the sight of the shapeless
block which was supposed to be the image of the goddess Leto, so too with me.
12
When I was very young I forgot in the cave of Trophonius how to laugh; when I
became older, when I opened my eyes and saw reality, I started to laugh and
haven’t stopped since. I saw the meaning of life was getting a livelihood, its goal
acquiring a titular office,
13
that love’s rich desire was getting hold of a well-to-do
girl, that the blessedness of friendship was to help one another in financial
embarrassment, that wisdom was what the majority assumed it to be, that
enthusiasm was to make a speech, that courage was to risk losing ten dollars,
that cordiality consisted in saying ‘You’re welcome’ after a dinner, that fear of
God was to go to communion once a year. That’s what I saw, and I laughed.
What is it that binds me? Of what was the fetter that bound the Fenris wolf
formed?
14
It was wrought of the noise of the cat’s paws as it walks on the
ground, of women’s beards, of the roots of rocks, the sinews of the bear, the
breath offish, and the spittle of birds. So, too, am I bound by a fetter formed of
dark fancies, of disturbing dreams, of restless thoughts, of dire misgivings, of
inexplicable anxieties. This chain is ‘very supple, soft as silk, resilient to the
strongest tensions, and cannot be torn in two’.
15
It’s rather strange, the same thing preoccupies us at every age in life and we
always get just so far, or rather we go backwards. At fifteen when I was in
grammar school, I wrote with much unction about the proofs of God’s existence
and the immortality of the soul, about the concept of faith, about the significance
of the miracle. For my examen artium I wrote an essay on the immortality of the
soul for which I was awarded prae ceteris; later I won a prize for an essay on
this subject. Who would believe, after such a solid and very promising start, that
in my twenty-fifth year I should have reached the point where I cannot produce a
single proof of the immortality of the soul. I remember particularly from my
school days that an essay of mine on ‘The Immortality of the Soul’ received
exceptional praise from the teacher and was read out by him, as much for the
beauty of the style as for the content. Alas! I threw that essay away long ago.
How unfortunate! Perhaps my doubting soul would have been captivated by it,
as much for the content as for the beauty of the style. So my advice to parents,
guardians and teachers is to warn children entrusted to them to set aside the
Danish essays written at the age of fifteen. Giving this advice is the only thing I
can do for the good of mankind. […]
How true to form human nature runs! With what native genius a small child
often shows us a living image of the larger situation. I was greatly amused today
at little Ludvig. He sat in his little chair and looked about him with visible
pleasure. Then the nanny, Mary, went through the room. ‘Mary.’ ‘Yes, little
Ludvig,’ she answered with her usual friendliness and came over to him. He
leaned his large head slightly to one side, fastened his immense eyes upon her
with a touch of roguishness, and then said quite phlegmatically: ‘Not this Mary,
it was the other Mary.’ What do we older people do? We cry out to the whole
world, and when it makes a friendly approach, we say: ‘It wasn’t this Mary.’
My life is like an eternal night; when at last I die, I can say with Achilles:
Du bist vollbracht, Nachtweide meines Daseyns.
16
[…]
I am like the Lüneburger pig.
17 My thinking is a passion. I am very good at
rooting out truffles for others; I myself take no pleasure in them. I root out the
problems with my snout, but all I can do with them is toss them back over my
head.
I struggle in vain. My foot slips. My life is still a poet’s existence. What could
be more unhappy? I am chosen; fate laughs at me when it suddenly shows me
how everything I do to resist becomes an element in such an existence. I depict
hope so vividly that every hopeful individual will recognize himself in my
portrayal; and yet it is a fake, for while I depict it I am thinking of recollection.
[…]
How terrible is tedium – how terribly tedious. I know no stronger expression,
none truer, for like is all that like knows. If only there were a higher expression,
a stronger one, then at least there would still be some movement. I lie stretched
out, inert; all I see is emptiness, all I live on is emptiness, all I move in is
emptiness. I do not even suffer pain. At least the vulture kept on pecking at
Prometheus’s liver, and Loki had the poison constantly dripping down on him; at
least there was an interruption, however monotonous. But even pain has lost its
power to refresh me. Were I offered all the world’s glories or all its torments,
they would affect me indifferently, I would not turn over on the other side either
to reach for or to escape them. I die death itself.
18
Is there anything that could
divert me? Yes, if I caught sight of a fidelity that stood every trial, an enthusiasm
that sustained everything, a faith that moved mountains; if I came by a thought
that bound together the finite and the infinite. But my soul’s poisonous doubt is
all-consuming. My soul is like the dead sea, over which no bird can fly; when it
gets halfway, it sinks down spent to its death and destruction. […]
Tautology nevertheless is and remains the supreme principle, the highest law
of thought.
19 So no wonder that most people use it. It’s not all that impoverished
either, and might well fill out a whole life. It has its playful, witty, entertaining
form in the infinite judgements.
20 This is the paradoxical and transcendental kind
of tautology. It has its serious, scientific and edifying form. The formula for this
is: when each of two magnitudes are equal to one and the same third magnitude,
they are equal to each other. This is a quantitative inference. This kind of
tautology is especially useful for rostrums and pulpits, where one is expected to
say something significant.
The disproportion in my build is that my forelegs are too short. Like the
Australian kangaroo I have quite short forelegs but infinitely long hind legs. As a
rule I sit quite still, but whenever I move I make a huge leap to the horror of all
those to whom I am bound by the tender bonds of kinship and friendship.
EITHER/OR
An ecstatic lecture
If you marry, you will regret it; if you do not marry, you will also regret it; if
you marry or if you do not marry, you will regret both; whether you marry or
you do not marry, you will regret both. Laugh at the world’s follies, you will
regret it; weep over them, you will also regret it; if you laugh at the world’s
follies or if you weep over them, you will regret both; whether you laugh at the
world’s follies or you weep over them, you will regret both. Believe a girl, you
will regret it; if you do not believe her, you will also regret it; if you believe a
girl or you do not believe her, you will regret both; whether you believe a girl or
you do not believe her, you will regret both. If you hang yourself, you will regret
it; if you do not hang yourself, you will regret it; if you hang yourself or you do
not hang yourself, you will regret both; whether you hang yourself or you do not
hang yourself, you will regret both. This, gentlemen, is the sum of all practical
wisdom. It isn’t just in single moments that I view everything aeterno modo, as
Spinoza says; I am constantly aeterno modo. Many people think that’s what they
are too when, having done the one or the other, they combine or mediate these
opposites. But this is a misunderstanding, for the true eternity lies not behind
either/or but ahead of it. So their eternity will also be in a painful succession of
moments in time, since they will have the double regret to live on. My practical
wisdom is easy to understand, for I have only one principle, which is not even
my starting-point. One must distinguish between the successive dialectic in
either/or and the eternal dialectic touched on here. In saying that I do not start
out from my principle, the opposite of this is not a starting-out from it, but
simply the negative expression of my principle, the expression for its grasping
itself as in opposition to a starting-out or a not-starting-out from it. I do not start
out from my principle, for were I to do so, I would regret it. If I were not to start
out from it, I would also regret it. Therefore if it seemed to any of my highly
esteemed hearers that there was something in what I was saying, he would only
prove that his mind was unsuited to philosophy. If he thought there was
movement in what was said, that would prove the same. On the other hand, for
those hearers capable of following me, in spite of my not making any movement,
I will now unfold the eternal truth whereby this philosophy remains in itself and
admits of nothing higher. For if I started out from my principle, I would be
unable to stop again; if I didn’t stop, I would regret it; if I stopped, I would also
regret it, etc. Since I never start, however, I can always stop, for my eternal
starting is my eternal stopping. Experience has shown that it isn’t at all difficult
for philosophy to begin. Far from it: it begins with nothing and can accordingly
always begin.
21 What seems so difficult to philosophy and the philosophers is to
stop. This difficulty, too, I have avoided. For if anyone believed that in stopping
at this point I am really stopping, he proves he has no speculative insight. For I
do not stop; I stopped that time I began. My philosophy has, therefore, the
advantage of brevity and irrefutability. For if anyone were to contradict it I
would surely be justified in pronouncing him insane. Philosophy, then, is
constantly aetemo modo and does not have, like blessed Sintenis,
22
just single
hours which are lived for eternity.
Why wasn’t I born in Nyboder, why didn’t I die as a small child? Then my
father would have laid me in a little coffin, taken me under his arm, carried me
out one Sunday morning to the grave, thrown the earth upon the coffin himself,
said a few words half aloud that only he could understand. It could only occur to
the unhappy days of old to let small children weep in Elysium because they had
died so young.
23
[…]
My misfortune is this: an angel of death always walks by my side, and it is not
the doors of the elect that I am to sprinkle with blood, as a sign that he is to pass
them by;
24 no, it is precisely their doors that he enters – for only the love that
lives in memory is happy.
Wine no longer gladdens my heart; a little of it makes me sad – much,
melancholic. My soul is faint and powerless; I dig the spur of pleasure in vain
into its flank, it can no more, it no longer rises up in its royal prance. I have lost
all my illusions. In vain I try to abandon myself to the infinity of joy; it cannot
raise me up, or rather, I cannot raise myself up. Once it had only to beckon and I
rose light of foot, sound in body, and bold. When I rode slowly through the
forest, it was as though I flew; now when the horse froths ready to drop, it feels
as though I do not budge. I am alone, as I have always been; abandoned not by
men, that would not pain me, but by the happy spirits of joy who in countless
hosts encircled me, who met everywhere with their kind, pointed everywhere to
an opportunity. As an intoxicated man gathers youth’s wanton swarm around
him, so they flocked about me, the elves of joy, and my smile was due to them.
My soul has lost possibility. Were I to wish for anything I would not wish for
wealth and power, but for the passion of the possible, that eye which
everywhere, ever young, ever burning, sees possibility. Pleasure disappoints, not
possibility. And what wine is so sparkling, what so fragrant, so intoxicating! […]
My sorrow is my knight’s castle, which lies like an eagle’s eyrie high up upon
the mountain peaks among the clouds. No one can take it by storm. From it I fly
down into reality and seize my prey; but I do not remain down there, I bring my
prey home; and this prey is a picture I weave into the tapestries in my palace.
Then I live as one dead. In the baptism of forgetfulness I plunge everything
experienced into the eternity of remembrance; everything finite and contingent is
forgotten and erased. Then I sit thoughtful like an old man, grey-headed, and in a
low voice, almost a whisper, explain the pictures; and by my side a child sits and
listens, even though he remembers everything before I tell it.
The sun shines into my room so beautiful and bright; in the next room the
window is open. In the street everything is quiet; it is Sunday afternoon. I hear
clearly a lark, warbling outside a window in one of the neighbouring buildings,
outside the window where the pretty girl lives. Far away, from a distant street, I
hear a man crying shrimps. The air is so warm, yet the whole city seems dead. –
Then I am reminded of my youth and my first love – I longed then, now I only
long for my first longing. What is youth? A dream. What is love? The dream’s
content.
Something wonderful happened to me. I was transported into the seventh
heaven. All the gods sat there in assembly. By special grace I was accorded the
favour of a wish. ‘Will you,’said Mercury, ‘have youth, or beauty, or power, or a
long life, or the prettiest girl, or any other of the many splendours we have in our
chest of knick-knacks? So choose, but just one thing.’ For a moment I was at a
loss. Then I addressed myself to the gods as follows: ‘Esteemed contemporaries,
I choose one thing: always to have the laughter on my side.’ Not a single word
did one god offer in answer; on the contrary they all began to laugh. From this I
concluded that my prayer was fulfilled and that the gods knew how to express
themselves with taste, for it would hardly have been fitting gravely to answer, ‘It
has been granted you.’
2 THE IMMEDIATE EROTIC STAGES
OR
THE MUSICAL EROTIC
PLATITUDINOUS INTRODUCTION
From the moment my soul was first overwhelmed in wonder at Mozart’s
music, and bowed down to it in humble admiration, it has often been my
cherished and rewarding pastime to reflect upon how that happy Greek view that
calls the world a cosmos, because it manifests itself as an orderly whole, a
tasteful and transparent adornment of the spirit that works upon and in it – upon
how that happy view repeats itself in a higher order of things, in the world of
ideals, how it may be a ruling wisdom there too, mainly to be admired for
joining together those things that belong with one another: Axel with Valborg,
Homer with the Trojan War, Raphael with Catholicism, Mozart with Don Juan.
A wretched unbelief exists which seems to contain much healing power. It thinks
such a connection fortuitous and sees in it no more than a lucky concurrence of
the different forces at play in life. It thinks it an accident that the lovers get each
other, an accident that they love each other; there were a hundred other girls he
could have been just as happy with, whom he could have loved just as deeply. It
thinks many a poet has existed who would have been just as immortal as Homer
had that marvellous material not been seized on by him, many a composer just as
immortal as Mozart had only the opportunity offered. Now this wisdom contains
much solace and comfort for all mediocre minds since it lets them and likeminded spirits fancy that the reason they are not as celebrated as the celebrities is
some confusion of fate, a mistake on the part of the world. This produces a most
convenient optimism. But to every high-minded soul, to every optimate
1 who
does not feel bound to save himself in such a pitiable manner as by losing
himself in contemplation of the great, it is of course repugnant, while his soul
delights and it is his holy joy to see united those things that belong together. This
is what fortune is, not in the fortuitous sense, and so it presupposes two factors
whereas the fortuitous consists in the inarticulate interjections of fate. This is
what historical fortune consists in: the divine conjuncture of historical forces, the
heyday of historical time. The fortuitous has just one factor: the accident that the
most remarkable epic theme imaginable fell to Homer’s lot in the shape of the
history of the Trojan wars. In good fortune there are two: that the most
remarkable epic material came to the lot of Homer. The accent lies here on
Homer as much as on the material. In this lies the profound harmony that
resounds in every work of art we call classic. And so too with Mozart: it is a
piece of good fortune that what in a deeper sense is perhaps the only true
musical subject was granted – to Mozart.
With his Don Giovanni Mozart enters that small, immortal band of men whose
names, whose works, time will not forget, for they are remembered in eternity.
And although, once having entered, it is a matter of indifference whether one is
placed highest or lowest, because in a sense they are equally, because infinitely,
high, and although it is childish to argue over the highest and the lowest place
here, as if for one’s place in line at confirmation, I am still far too much a child,
or rather, I am like a young girl in love with Mozart and must have him placed
highest whatever the cost. And I shall appeal to the deacon and the priest and the
dean and the bishop and the entire consistory, and I shall beg and beseech them
to grant my prayer, and I shall implore the whole congregation for the same; and
if they refuse to hear my prayer, if they refuse to grant my childish wish, I shall
retire from the congregation and renounce its ways of thinking, I shall form a
sect that not only places Mozart highest but simply refuses to accept anyone
besides Mozart; and I shall beg Mozart to forgive me because his music did not
inspire me to great deeds but made a fool of me – I, who through him lost the
last grain of reason I possessed, and now spend most of my time in quiet sadness
humming what I do not understand, haunting like a ghost what I cannot enter
into. Immortal Mozart! You, to whom I owe everything, to whom I owe the loss
of my reason, the wonder that overwhelmed my soul, the fear that gripped my
inmost being; you, who are the reason I did not go through life without there
being something that could make me tremble; you, whom I thank for the fact
that I shall not have died without having loved, even though my love was
unhappy. What wonder then that I should be more jealous of his glorification
than of the happiest moment of my own life, more jealous of his immortality
than of my own existence. Yes, to take him away, to efface his name, would be
to overturn the only pillar that hitherto has prevented everything collapsing for
me into a boundless chaos, into a fearful nothingness.
Though I have no fear that any age will deny him a place in that kingdom of
the gods, I must be prepared for people to think it childish of me to insist that he
have the first place. And though I by no means intend to be ashamed of my
childishness, although for me that will always be more meaningful and have
more worth than any exhaustive meditation precisely because it can be
exhausted, I shall nevertheless attempt a considered proof of his legal title.
The happy feature of the classic work, what constitutes its classic nature and
immortality, is the way in which the two forces absolutely cohere. This cohesion
is so absolute that a later reflective age can hardly separate, even in thought,
what is so intimately united without risk of giving rise to or entertaining a
misunderstanding. Thus, its being said that it is Homer’s good fortune to have
acquired the most remarkable epic theme can make us forget that it is always in
Homer’s grasp of it that this topic comes down to us, and that its seeming to be
the most perfect epic subject-matter is clear to us only in and through the
transubstantiation that is due to Homer. If, on the other hand, one puts the
emphasis on the poetic activity with which Homer penetrated the material, one is
in danger of forgetting that the poem would never have become what it is unless
the thought with which Homer penetrated it was its own thought, unless the form
was that of the matter itself. The poet wants his material; but wanting is no art,
as one says, quite rightly and with much truth in the case of a host of impotent
poetic wants. To want rightly, on the other hand, is a great art, or rather, it is a
gift. It is what is inexplicable and mysterious about genius, just like the divining
rod, to which it never occurs to want except in the presence of what it wants.
Here, then, wanting is far more profoundly significant than usual; yes, to the
abstract understanding it may seem ridiculous, since the latter really thinks of
wanting in respect of what is not, not in respect of what is.
There was a school of aesthetics which by one-sidedly stressing the importance
of form can be accused of occasioning the opposite misunderstanding.
2
It has
often seemed strange to me that these aestheticians unquestioningly adhered to
the Hegelian philosophy, seeing that even a general familiarity with Hegel, and
not specifically with his aesthetics, makes it clear that above all he places great
emphasis in aesthetic respects on the importance of the subject-matter. However,
both go essentially together, and to show this it is enough to point to a single fact
since otherwise nothing of the kind would be thinkable. It is usually only a
single work, or a single set of works, that stamps the individual poet or artist,
etc. as a classic. The same individual may have produced many different things
which stand in no relation to this. Thus Homer has also written a
Batrachomyomachia,
3 but has not become a classic or immortal on that account.
To say that that is due to the insignificance of the subject is foolish indeed, for it
is the balance that makes a work a classic. If what made it a classic lay only in
the individual artist, then everything he produced would have to be a classic, in a
similar though higher sense as that in which the bee always produces a certain
type of cell. Were one then to reply that the reason is that he has been luckier
with the one than with the other, one would really not have replied at all. This is
in part just a superior tautology, of the kind that all too often enjoy the honour of
being taken for answers. In part, considered as an answer, it is the answer given
inside another relativity than the one in which the question is posed. For it tells
us nothing about the relation between matter and form, and could at best come
into consideration when it is a question of the formative activity alone.
Now Mozart’s case is similar: there is one work alone of his which makes him
a classic composer and absolutely immortal. That work is Don Giovanni.
Whatever else he has produced may cause pleasure and delight, arouse our
admiration, enrich the soul, satisfy the ear, gladden the heart; but it does him and
his immortality no service to lump everything together and make everything
equally great. Don Giovanni is his acceptance piece.
4 With Don Giovanni he
enters that eternity which lies not outside time but within it, which no curtain
conceals from human eyes, into which the immortals are admitted not once and
for all but are constantly discovered as one generation passes and turns its gaze
towards them, is happy in its contemplation of them, goes to the grave, and the
next generation passes in its turn and is transfigured in its contemplation.
Through his Don Giovanni he enters the ranks of those immortals, of those
visibly transfigured ones, whom no cloud ever carried away from the eyes of
man.
5 Through Don Giovanni he ranks highest among them. It was this, as was
said above, that I would try to prove.
All classic works, as earlier remarked, rank equally high because each one
ranks infinitely high. Nevertheless, if one tries to introduce some order into this
procession, it is evident that one can base it on nothing essential; for if one
could, it would follow that there was an essential difference, and from that it
would follow in turn that the word ‘classic’ was incorrectly predicated of them
collectively. Thus, to ground a classification on the different nature of the
subject-matter would immediately involve one in a misunderstanding which in
its wider implications would end in the rescinding of the whole concept of the
classic. The subject-matter is an essential factor to the extent that it is one of the
factors, but it is not the absolute, since it is indeed just one factor. One could
point out that certain kinds of classic in a sense have no subject-matter, whereas
with others the subject-matter plays such an important part. The first would be
the case with the works we admire as classics in architecture, sculpture, music
and painting, especially the first three, and even with painting so far as the
subject-matter enters into it, for its importance is really only in providing the
occasion. The second would apply to poetry, taking that word in its widest sense
to designate all artistic production based on language and the historical
consciousness. In itself this observation is quite correct, but if one tries to base a
classification on it by seeing the absence of subject-matter or its presence as a
help or a hindrance to the productive subject, one goes adrift. Strictly speaking,
one would be urging the opposite of what one really intended, as always happens
when one operates abstractly in dialectical categories, where it isn’t just that we
say one thing and mean another but we say the other; we say not what we think
we are saying but the opposite. So it is when we make the subject-matter the
principle of classification. In talking about this, we talk about something quite
different, namely the formative activity.
6
If, on the other hand, we proceed from
the formative activity and stress only that, we suffer the same fate. By trying to
call on the difference, and thus stress that in some directions the formative
activity is creative to the degree that it also creates the subject-matter while in
others it receives it, here again, even though we think we are talking about the
formative activity, we are really talking about the subject-matter and in fact
using that as the basis of our classification. Exactly the same applies to the
formative activity as a point of departure as to the subject-matter. It is never
possible, therefore, to use just one of them as an ordering principle; it will
always be too essential to provide sufficient contingency, too accidental to
provide an essential ordering. But this absolute mutual penetration, which
implies, if we are to speak plainly, that we can just as well say that the matter
penetrates the form as that the form penetrates the matter – this mutual
penetration, this ‘like for like’ in the immortal friendship of the classic, may
serve to throw light on a new side of the classic and confine it so that it does not
become too ample. For those aestheticians who one-sidedly pressed the case of
poetic activity so broadened this concept as to enrich, indeed overburden, that
pantheon with classic knick-knacks and trifles, so much so that the natural
conception of a cool hall of great figures of individual distinction disappeared
altogether, and the pantheon became a junk-room instead. According to this
aesthetics, every pretty little piece of artistic perfection is a classic work assured
of absolute immortality; in this hocus-pocus admittance indeed was given above
all to small trifles of this kind. Although otherwise hating paradox, no one feared
the paradox that the least was really art. The error consists in one-sidedly
highlighting the formal activity. So an aesthetics of this kind could only sustain
itself for a definite time, that is for as long as no one was aware that time
mocked it and its classic works. This view was, in the field of aesthetics, a form
of the radicalism that has manifested itself similarly in so many spheres; it was
an expression of the unbridled subject in its equally unbridled emptiness. This
effort, however, like so many, found its suppressor in Hegel. It is, in general, a
sad fact with regard to the Hegelian philosophy that it hasn’t at all acquired the
importance, either for a previous or a present age, that it would have had if the
previous one had not been so busy scaring people into it, but on the contrary had
given them a little more calm in which to appropriate it, and the present one had
not been so tirelessly active in hustling people beyond it. Hegel brought back the
subject-matter, the idea in its proper right, and thereby banished all these
ephemeral classics, these insubstantial beings – dusk moths from the vaults of
classicality. It is far from our intention to deny these works their due value; the
point is to ensure that the language here is not confused, the concepts
impoverished, as happens in so many other places. A certain eternity one may
gladly accord them, and this they deserve; yet this eternity is really only the
eternal instant which every true work of art possesses, not that full-bodied
eternity in the midst of the vicissitudes of the times. What these products lacked
was ideas, and the greater their formal perfection, the more quickly they burnt
themselves out. The more their technical proficiency was developed to the
highest degree of virtuosity, the more transient this virtuosity became and it had
neither courage and strength nor poise to withstand the blows of time, while with
an increasingly superior air making ever greater claims to be the most rarefied of
spirits. Only where the idea is brought to rest transparently in a definite form can
we talk of a classic work, but then it will also be able to stand up to the times.
This unity, this inward mutuality, is possessed by every classic work, and thus
one easily sees that any attempt at classifying the different classics based on a
separation of matter and form, or of idea and form, is by virtue of that very fact a
failure.
One might conceive another approach. One could make the object of
consideration the medium in which the idea is manifested, and noting how one
medium was richer, another poorer, base the classification on the fact that one
sees help or hindrance in variations of richness or poverty of the medium. But
the medium stands in far too necessary a relation to the whole work for a
classification based on it not to get entangled, after a step or two, in the
difficulties stressed above.
On the other hand, I believe the following observations will open the way for a
classification which will have validity precisely because it is altogether
contingent. The more abstract and hence impoverished the idea is, and the more
abstract and hence impoverished the medium, the greater the probability that no
repetition is conceivable, the greater the probability that having found its
expression it has acquired it once and for all. On the other hand, the more
concrete and hence richer the idea, and similarly with the medium, the greater
the probability of a repetition. If I now arrange all the different classics side by
side and, without putting them in any order, am amazed precisely to find that
they all rank equally high, then one section may still easily prove to contain
more works than another, or if not there is the possibility of its doing so, while
such a possibility seems less likely in the case of the other.
This is something I wish to develop in a little more detail. The more abstract
the idea, the less the probability. But how does the idea become concrete? By
being permeated with the historical. The more concrete the idea the greater the
probability. The more abstract the medium the less the probability, the more
concrete the greater. But what does it mean to say that the medium is concrete
except that it either does or is seen to approximate to language; for language is
the most concrete of all media. The idea which manifests itself in sculpture is
entirely abstract, it bears no relation to the historical, and the medium in which it
manifests itself is similarly abstract; accordingly the probability that the section
of classics embracing sculpture will contain only a few works is large. In this I
have all the testimony of time and the assent of experience. If, on the other hand,
I take a concrete idea and a concrete medium, it proves otherwise. Thus Homer,
indeed, is a classic epic poet, but precisely because the idea which comes to light
in the epic is a concrete idea, and because the medium is language, the section of
classic works embracing the epic can be thought to contain several works all
equally classic since history is continually giving us new epic material. In this,
too, I have the testimony of history and the assent of experience.
Seeing that my classification is based on this complete contingency, its own
contingency can hardly be denied. But if that was what I were to be criticized
for, my reply would be that the criticism is misplaced because that is just how it
should be. It is a contingent fact that the one section contains, or can contain, a
greater number than the other. But because this is a contingency one could
clearly just as well place that class highest which does or might have the highest
number. I could stick to my previous reasoning at this point and quite evenly
reply that this was perfectly correct but that one should only praise my
consistency all the more for placing the opposite class highest altogether
contingently. However, I shall not do that but appeal on the contrary to
something which speaks in my favour, namely that the sections which embrace
the concrete ideas are not complete and do not allow of such completion. For
that reason it is more natural to place the others first and hold the double-doors
constantly open for the latter. But if it were objected that it was an imperfection,
a deficiency on the part of that first class, then the objector would be ploughing
outside the furrows of my own thought and I cannot heed his speech however
profound it may be; for the fixed point is indeed that, seen essentially, everything
is equally perfect.
But what is the most abstract idea? Our concern here, of course, is only with an
idea that can become the object of an artistic treatment, not with ideas that lend
themselves to scientific presentation. Which is the most abstract medium? I shall
answer the latter first. The medium farthest removed from language.
Before proceeding to the first question, however, I would call the reader’s
attention to something that affects the final solution to my problem. It is not
always the case that the most abstract medium has as its object the most abstract
idea. Thus although the medium used by the architect is the most abstract, the
ideas brought to light in architecture are not at all the most abstract. Architecture
bears a much closer relation to history than does, for example, sculpture. Yet
another choice now presents itself. In our order of ranking I can place in the first
class those works whose medium is the most abstract or those whose idea is the
most abstract. Here I select the idea, not the medium.
Of course abstract media are the prerogative of sculpture and painting and
music as well as architecture. This is not the place to pursue that question. The
most abstract idea conceivable is the spirit of sensuality.
7 But in what medium
can it be represented? Only in music. It cannot be represented in sculpture, for in
itself it is a kind of quality of inwardness. It cannot be painted, for it cannot be
grasped in fixed contours; it is an energy, a storm, impatience, passion, and so
on, in all their lyrical quality, existing not in a single moment but in a succession
of moments, for if it existed in a single moment it could be portrayed or painted.
Its existing in a succession of moments indicates its epic character, yet in a
stricter sense it is not an epic, for it has not reached the level of words; it moves
constantly in an immediacy. Nor can it be represented, therefore, in poetry. The
only medium that can represent it is music. For music has an element of time in
it yet it does not lapse in time except in an unimportant sense. What it cannot
express is the historical in time.
We have the perfect unity of this idea and its corresponding form in Mozart’s
Don Giovanni. But just because the idea is so immensely abstract, so too is the
medium abstract, and therefore there is no probability of Mozart’s ever having a
competitor. Mozart’s good fortune was to get hold of a subject that is in itself
absolutely musical, and were any other composer to vie with Mozart, all he
could do would be to compose Don Giovanni over again. Homer found a perfect
epic subject, but one can imagine many epic poems because history has more
epic material to offer. That is not the case with Don Giovanni. What I really
mean by this can perhaps best be grasped by pointing to the difference with a
related idea. Goethe’s Faust is a genuine classic, the idea is an historical one,
and so every significant historical age will have its Faust. Faust has language as
its medium, and the fact that language is a far more concrete medium is another
reason why several works of the same kind can be imagined. Don Giovanni, on
the other hand, is and will remain the only one of its kind, just as the classic
sculptures of Greece. But since the idea in Don Giovanni is far more abstract
even than that underlying sculpture, one sees easily why we have just one work
in music but several in sculpture. One can indeed imagine many more musical
classics, yet there still remains just one work of which it can be said that its idea
is absolutely musical, so that the music does not enter as an accompaniment but,
in bringing the idea to light, reveals its own innermost being. Therefore Mozart
with his Don Giovanni stands highest among the immortals.
But now I shall abandon this whole inquiry. It is written only for those in love.
And just as it takes little to please a child, everyone knows how the most curious
things can bring pleasure to people in love. It is like a heated lovers’ quarrel over
nothing, which nevertheless has its worth – for the lovers. Although the above
remarks have tried in every possible way, conceivable and inconceivable, to
secure acknowledgement of Mozart’s Don Giovanni as first among all classics,
virtually no attempt has been made to prove that it is indeed a classic. […] I
admit that to do that would be a very appropriate introduction to the real inquiry
[…] but it could never occur to me to undertake that task, however easily it
might come to me. But since I shall all the time be assuming the matter to be
beyond question, the sequel will offer many opportunities for, and ways of,
shedding light on Don Giovanni in this respect, just as what has gone before held
several hints.
The task this inquiry has really set itself is to show the significance of the
musical erotic, and to that end to indicate in turn the different stages which, all
sharing the property of being immediately erotic, agree also in all being
essentially musical. What I have to say on this score I owe to Mozart alone. So
should anyone be civil enough to concede that I am right in what I say, but have
some doubts as to how far what I say relates to Mozart’s music or to what I read
into it, I can assure him that he will find in the music not only the little that I
contrive to present here but infinitely more; indeed, I can assure him that this is
precisely the thought that makes me so bold as to hazard an explanation of
particular features of Mozart’s music. What someone has loved with the
infatuation and admired with the enthusiasm of youth, what someone has kept up
a clandestine and enigmatic commerce with in his innermost soul, what someone
has hidden away in his heart, that is something the like of which one always
approaches with a certain shyness, with mixed feelings, when one knows that the
intention is to try to understand it. What you have learned to know bit by bit, like
a bird gathering every little straw, happier over each small piece than over all the
rest of the world; what the loving ear has absorbed, solitary in the great
multitude, unremarked in its secret place of hiding; what the greedy ear has
snatched up, never gratified, the miserly ear hidden, never secure, that whose
softest echo has never deceived the searching ear’s sleepless vigil; what you
have lived by day, relived by night, what has banished sleep and made it
troubled; what you have dreamt of in sleep, what you have woken up to dream of
again when awake, what caused you to leap up in the middle of the night for fear
of forgetting it; what has come to you in your moments of greatest rapture; what
like a woman’s embroidery you keep constantly beside you; what has followed
you on the clear moonlit nights, in lonely forests by the shores, in the gloomy
streets, in the dead of night, at break of day, what has ridden with you on
horseback, accompanied you in the carriage, what permeates your home, what
your chamber has been witness to, what has echoed in your ear, resounded
through your soul, what your soul has spun into its finest web – that now reveals
itself to thought. As those mysterious beings in ancient tales rise from the ocean
bed invested in seaweed, so it now rises up from the sea of remembrance
interwoven with memories. The soul becomes sad and the heart soft, for it is as
though one bade it farewell, were parting from it never to meet again, either in
time or eternity. One feels as though unfaithful, that one has broken one’s
covenant, one feels one is no longer the same, not as young, not as childlike; one
fears for oneself in case one loses what has made one glad and happy and rich;
one fears for what one loves lest it suffer with this change, perhaps prove less
perfect, that possibly it will be at a loss for answers to the many questions; and
then, alas! all is lost, the spell is gone, and never more can it be evoked. As
regards Mozart’s music, my soul knows no fear, my confidence no bounds. In
part this is because what I have understood so far is so very little and there will
always be enough left over hiding in the shadows of presentiment; partly
because I am convinced that if Mozart ever became wholly comprehensible to
me, he would for the first time become wholly incomprehensible to me.
To maintain that Christianity has brought sensuality into the world seems
boldly venturesome. But nothing ventured, nothing gained, as the saying is, and
that goes here too, as will be apparent when one considers that in positing
something one indirectly posits the other thing which one excludes. Since
sensuality in general is what is negated, it first comes into view, is first posited,
through the act that excludes it by positing the opposite, positive principle. As a
principle, a power, a system in itself, sensuality was first posited with
Christianity, and to that extent Christianity has introduced sensuality to the
world. However, if one wishes properly to understand the proposition that
Christianity has introduced sensuality to the world, it must be understood
identically with its opposite, that it is Christianity that has chased sensuality out,
kept it out of the world. As a principle, a power, a system in itself, sensuality was
first posited with Christianity. I could add a further qualification which perhaps
makes my meaning most clear: it was Christianity that first posited sensuality
under the category of spirit. That is quite natural, for Christianity is spirit, and
spirit the positive principle it has introduced to the world. But when sensuality is
considered under the category of spirit, one sees that its significance is that it is
to be excluded; but it is precisely by the fact that it is to be excluded that it is
defined as a principle, as a power; for what spirit, itself a principle, is to exclude
must be something appearing in the form of a principle even though it only
appears as a principle the moment it is excluded. That sensuality has existed
before Christianity would naturally be a very foolish objection, for it is selfevident that what is to be excluded always pre-exists what excludes it, even if in
another sense it first comes into existence through its exclusion. This is due,
again, to its coming into existence in another sense, and that is why I said at the
start: nothing ventured, nothing gained.
Sensuality has indeed existed previously, but not defined spiritually. In what
manner then has it existed? It has existed under the category of soul. That is how
it existed in paganism and if one is looking for the most perfect expression of it,
that is how it existed in Greece. But under the category of soul, sensuality is not
opposition, exclusion, but harmony and accord. Precisely because sensuality is
posited under the category of harmony, however, it is not posited as a principle
but as an assonant enclitic.
8
The importance of this consideration is to cast light on the different forms
assumed by the erotic in the different steps in the development of the worldconsciousness, and so to lead us towards a definition of the immediate erotic as
identical with the musical erotic. In the Greek consciousness, sensuality was
under control in the beautiful individual, or more properly, it was not under
control for it was not indeed an enemy that had to be subdued, a dangerous rebel
to be kept in check; it was given freedom of life and joy in the beautiful
individual. Sensuality, consequently, was not posited as a principle; the quality
of soul that constituted the beautiful individual was inconceivable without the
sensual; for that reason neither was sensually based eroticism posited as a
principle. Sensual love was everywhere as an element, and present elementally
in the beautiful individual. The gods knew its power no less than men; the gods
no less than men knew their happy and unhappy love affairs. In none of them,
however, is love present as a principle; in so far as it existed in them, in the
individual, it was present as an element of love’s universal power, which
however was present nowhere, and therefore not even for the Greek conception
or in the Greek consciousness. It might be objected that Eros was, after all, the
god of love; so it must be possible to imagine love present as a principle at least
in him. But apart from the fact that here again love does not depend on the
erotic, in the sense of deriving from the sensual alone, but on qualities of the
soul, there is another factor to note which I shall now go into more closely.
Eros was the god of love but was not in love himself. In so far as the other
gods and men sensed the power of love in themselves, they attributed this to
Eros, referred it to him, but Eros was not himself in love; and the fact that it did
happen to him once
9 must be considered an exception; in spite of being the god
of love, he lagged far behind the other gods in the number of his adventures, and
far behind men. Indeed, that he did fall in love amounts to saying that he too
yielded to the universal power of love, which became in a way a power outside
him, and which, being turned away from him, had no place of its own where one
could seek it. And his love is not based on sensuality but on qualities of soul. It
is a genuinely Greek thought that the god of love is not himself in love while all
others owe it to him that they are. Were I to imagine a god or a goddess of
longing, it would be genuinely Greek to suppose that while all who felt the sweet
unrest or pain of longing referred it to this being, this being itself had no feeling
of longing. I know no better way of describing the remarkable nature of this
relation than by saying that it is the converse of representation. In the relation of
representation all the energy is gathered in a single individual and the particular
individuals share in him to the extent that they share in his particular
movements. I might also say, this relation is the converse of that upon which the
Incarnation is based. In the Incarnation the individual has the whole of life’s
fullness within him and the other individuals only have access to this from
beholding it in the incarnated individual. In the Greek relationship, the opposite
is the case. What makes for the power of the god is not in the god but in all the
other individuals who refer it to him; it is as though he himself were powerless,
impotent, because he communicates his energy to all the rest of the world. The
incarnated individual as it were sucks in the energy from all the others and the
fullness is then in him and only for the others to the extent that they behold it in
that individual. This will have consequences for what follows, just as it is
important in itself with regard to the categories which the world-consciousness
uses in different epochs. Sensuality as a principle is not to be found in the Greek
consciousness, nor do we find the erotic as a principle based on the principle of
the sensual; and even if we had found that, we still see – and this is of the
greatest importance for this inquiry – that the Greek consciousness lacks the
strength to concentrate the whole in a single individual but lets the whole radiate
to all the others from a point which lacks it, so that really this constitutive point
is to be identified by its being the only point which lacks what it gives to all
others.
Sensuality as a principle, then, is posited with Christianity, and similarly the
sensual erotic as a principle. The idea of representation was introduced to the
world by Christianity. If I imagine the sensual erotic as a principle, as a power,
as a realm characterized by spirit, that is to say characterized by being excluded
by spirit, if I imagine it concentrated in a single individual, then I have the
concept of the spirit of the sensual erotic. This is an idea which the Greeks did
not have, which Christianity first introduced to the world, if only in an indirect
sense.
If this spirit of the sensual erotic in all its immediacy demands expression, the
question is: what medium lends itself to that? What must be especially borne in
mind here is that it demands expression and representation in its immediacy. In
its mediate state and its reflection in something else it comes under language and
becomes subject to ethical categories. In its immediacy it can only be expressed
in music. On this score I must ask the reader to recall what was said about this in
the platitudinous introduction. This is where the significance of music is
revealed in its full validity, and in a stricter sense it also reveals itself as a
Christian art, or rather as the art which Christianity posits by shutting it out, as
the medium for what Christianity shuts out and thereby posits. In other words,
music is the demonic.
10
In the erotic sensual genius, music has its absolute
object. This of course by no means implies that music cannot express other
things, but this is nevertheless its proper object. Similarly, the art of sculpture
can represent much more than human beauty, and yet this is its absolute object;
painting can represent much more than celestially transfigured beauty, and still
this is its absolute object. The important thing in this respect is to be able to see
the concept in each art, and not let oneself be put off by what it can do besides.
Man’s concept is spirit and we must not allow ourselves to be put off by the fact
that he is also able to walk on two legs. Language’s concept is thought, and we
must not let ourselves be put off by the view of certain sensitive people that its
greatest significance is to produce inarticulate sounds.
Here I beg to be allowed a little platitudinous interlude; praeterea censeo,
11
that Mozart is the greatest among classical composers, and that his Don
Giovanni deserves the highest place among all classic works of art.
Now regarding the nature of music as a medium, this will naturally always be a
very interesting problem. Whether I am able to say anything adequate on the
matter is another question. I am well aware that I have no understanding of
music. I freely admit that I am a layman. I do not hide the fact that I am not one
of those select people who possess musical expertise, that I am at most a
proselyte of the gate,
12 whom a strangely irresistible impulse carried from afar to
this point but no further. And yet it could be that the little I have to say contained
some particular remark which, if it met with favour and indulgence, might be
found to contain some truth even if it concealed itself under a shabby coat. I
stand outside music and from this standpoint I observe it. That this standpoint is
very imperfect I freely admit; that I am able to see very little in comparison with
those fortunate people who stand inside I do not deny; but I still continue to hope
that from my standpoint I too may be able to impart some odd piece of
enlightenment on the subject, although the initiated could do it much better –
yes, to some extent even understand what I say better than I do myself. If I were
to imagine two countries bordering on each other, with one of which I was fairly
familiar and with the other was quite unfamiliar, and I was not allowed to enter
that unknown realm however much I wanted to, I should still be able to form
some conception of it. I would travel to the boundaries of the kingdom I knew
and follow them constantly, and as I did so my movements would describe the
contours of that unknown land; in this way I would form a general idea of it even
though I had never set foot in it. And if this was a task that greatly occupied me,
and if I was indefatigable in my accuracy, it would no doubt sometimes happen
that, as I stood sadly at my own country’s boundary and looked longingly into
that unknown land which was so near me and yet so far, some little revelation
might fall to my lot. And although I feel that music is an art which requires
experience to a high degree to justify one’s having an opinion about it, still I
comfort myself again, as so often, with the paradox that there is experience to be
gained in presentiment and in ignorance. I comfort myself by remembering that
Diana, who had not herself given birth, nevertheless came to the assistance of
the childbearing woman; indeed that she had this as a native gift from childhood
so that she came to Latona’s assistance in her labour when she herself was born.
The country known to me, to whose furthest boundaries I intend to go in order
to discover music, is language. If one wants to arrange the different media
according to a definite order of development, one must place music and
language next to each other; for which reason it has also been said that music is a
language, which is more than just a brilliant remark. If one liked indulging in
brilliance one could say that sculpture and painting, too, are a kind of language,
in so far as every way of expressing an idea is always a language, since language
is the essence of the idea. Brilliant people talk, therefore, of the language of
nature, and maudlin clergymen now and then open up the book of nature for us
to read something which neither they nor their hearers understand. If the remark
that music is a language was in no better shape than this, I should not question it
but let it pass and count for what it is. But that is not how it is. It is only when
spirit is posited that language comes into its rights; but when spirit is posited,
everything that is not spirit is excluded. But this exclusion is a qualification of
spirit, and to the degree, then, that what is excluded is to assert itself it needs a
spiritually qualified medium, and this is music. But a medium which is
spiritually determined is essentially language; then since music is spiritually
determined, it has justly been called a language.
As a medium, language is the one absolutely spiritually qualified medium; it is
therefore the proper medium for the idea. To elaborate this point in more detail
goes beyond both my competence and the scope of this little inquiry. Just one
remark, however, which again brings me back to music. In language the sensual
is, as medium, reduced to the level of mere instrument and constantly negated.
Such is not the case with the other media. Neither in sculpture nor in painting is
the sensual a mere instrument but an integral part, nor is it constantly negated,
for it must continually be part of what is seen. It would be a peculiarly perverted
way of looking at a statue or a painting to ignore the sensual aspect, thus
completely rescinding its beauty. In sculpture, architecture, painting, the idea is
bound up with the medium; but this fact that the idea neither reduces the medium
to the level of mere instrument, nor constantly negates it, is as it were an
expression of the fact that that medium cannot speak. So too with nature.
Therefore we rightly say that nature is dumb, and architecture and sculpture and
painting; we say it rightly in spite of all those fine-tuned, sensitive ears that can
hear them speak. It is therefore idiocy to say that nature is a language, as it is
inept to say that the mute is vocal, since it is not even a language in the sense in
which sign-language is. But with language it is different. The sensual is reduced
to mere instrument and thus rescinded. If when a man spoke one heard the
movements of his tongue, etc., he would speak badly; if when he heard, he heard
the air vibrations instead of the words, he would hear badly; if when reading a
book one constantly saw the individual letters, one would read badly. Language
becomes the perfect medium just at the moment when everything sensual is
negated in it. So also with music; what should really be heard constantly
emancipates itself from the sensual. That music, as a medium, does not stand as
high as language has already been pointed out, and that is also why I said that
only in a certain sense was music a language.
Language makes its appeal to the ear. No other medium does that. The ear is
the most spiritually determined of the senses. This I believe most people will
admit. Should anyone wish further information on this point, I refer him to the
preface of Karikaturen des Heiligsten by Steffens.
13 Beside language, music is
the only medium that addresses the ear. In this we have yet another analogy and
testimony to the way in which music is a language. There is much in nature
which addresses itself to the ear but what affects the ear is the purely sensual,
and therefore nature is dumb. And it is a ridiculous fancy that one hears
something because one hears a cow moo or, what has perhaps a larger claim in
this respect, a nightingale sing; it is mere imagination to think that one hears
something, mere imagination that the one is worth more than the other, for it’s all
six of one and half a dozen of the other.
Language has time as its element; all other media have space as their element.
Only music also takes place in time, but the fact that it takes place in time is
again a negation of the sensual. With products of the other arts, their sensual
character indicates precisely that they have their existence in space. Now, of
course, again there is much in nature that takes place in time. Thus when a brook
murmurs and continues to murmur it seems to have the character of time.
However, that is not so, and were one to insist that there was this character of
time, one would have to say that although it was there, it was present in a
spatialized way. Music exists only in the moment of its performance, for
however skilful one may be at reading notes and however lively one’s
imagination, it cannot be denied that it is only in an unreal sense that the music
exists when read. It exists really only when it is performed. This might seem to
be an imperfection in this art as compared with the others, whose works
constantly endure because they have their existence in the sensual. Yet that is not
so. Rather it is a proof that music is a higher, a more spiritual art.
If I begin with language, in order, by moving through it, to as it were hear my
way towards music, the matter appears to be roughly as follows. If I assume that
prose is the language-form farthest removed from music, then I detect already in
the oratorical style of delivery, in the sonorous structure of periods, a suggestion
of the musical which comes more and more strongly to the fore through different
levels in the poetic style, in the structure of the verse, in the rhyme, until at last
the musical has developed so strongly that language ceases and everything
becomes music. This latter is indeed a favourite expression of the poets, who use
it to indicate that in a way they disown the idea, the idea drops out of their view,
everything ends in music. This might seem to indicate that music is an even
more perfect medium than language. However, that is one of those mawkish
misunderstandings which originate only in empty heads. That it is a
misunderstanding will be shown later; here I would only draw attention to the
remarkable circumstance that by moving through language in the opposite
direction I again come up against music; that is, when I proceed downward from
conceptpermeated prose until I land in interjections which again are musical, just
as the child’s first babbling is musical. Here, however, it could hardly be said
that music is a more perfect medium than language, or that music is a richer
medium than language, unless one takes saying ‘ugh!’ to be worth more than a
whole thought. But what follows from this – that wherever language comes to an
end, I run into the musical? Surely, it is the most perfect expression of the idea
that music always sets limits to language. One sees in addition how this is
connected with the misunderstanding that music is a richer medium than
language. In saying that when language stops, music begins, and in saying, as
people do, that everything is musical, we are not going onwards but back. That is
why I have never had any sympathy – and here perhaps even the experts will
agree with me – for that purified music which thinks it can do without words.
For as a rule it thinks of itself as being above the word, in spite of being its
inferior. Now one might object as follows: ‘If it is true that language is a richer
medium than music, it is incomprehensible why it should be so hard to give an
aesthetic account of the musical, incomprehensible that language should always
prove in this connection a poorer medium than music.’ However, it is neither
incomprehensible nor beyond explanation. For music always expresses the
immediate in its immediacy. That is also why in relation to language music
comes first and last; but from this one also sees it is a misunderstanding to say
that music is a more perfect medium. In language there is reflection and
therefore language cannot express the immediate. Reflection kills the immediate
and that is why it is impossible to express the musical in language; but this
apparent poverty of language is precisely its wealth. For the immediate is the
indeterminable and so language cannot apprehend it, but the fact that it is
indeterminable is not its perfection but a defect. This is indirectly acknowledged
in many ways. Thus to cite but one example, we say: ‘I can’t really explain why
I do this or that, in this way or that; I do it by ear.’ In connection with things
bearing no relation to music we frequently use a word taken from music, but
what we indicate by its use is the obscure, the unaccountable, the immediate.
Now if the immediate, qualified spiritually, is what is properly expressed in
music, one may ask again, more explicitly, what species of the immediate is
essentially music’s object. The immediate, qualified spiritually, can be specified
as falling either within the sphere of the spiritual or outside it. When the
immediate, qualified spiritually, is specified as falling within the sphere of the
spiritual, it can well find its expression in the musical, but this immediacy cannot
be music’s absolute object, for so specifying it as to include it within the spiritual
suggests that music is in a sphere foreign to it; it forms a constantly cancelled
prelude. But if the immediate, qualified spiritually, is so specified as to fall
outside the spiritual, we have then music’s absolute object. For the former
species of the immediate it is not essential that it be expressed in music but
essential for it to become spirit, and accordingly to be expressed in language. For
the latter it is, on the contrary, essential that it be expressed in music, it cannot be
expressed other than in music, it cannot be expressed in language, since
spiritually it is so specified as to fall outside the spiritual and accordingly outside
language. But the immediacy thus excluded by the spirit is sensual immediacy.
This belongs to Christianity. In music it has its absolute medium, and from this
can also be explained the fact that music was not properly developed in antiquity
but belongs to the Christian era. Music is, then, the medium for that species of
the immediate which, qualified spiritually, is specified as lying outside spirit.
Naturally, music can express much else, but this is its absolute object. It is also
easy to see that music is a more sensual medium than language, much more
stress being placed here on the sensual sound than in language.
Sensual genius is thus music’s absolute object. Sensual genius is absolutely
lyrical, and in music it breaks out in all its lyrical impatience, for it is qualified
spiritually and is therefore power, life, movement, constant unrest, continual
succession. But this unrest, this succession, does not enrich it; its spirit remains
always the same, it does not develop but rages on uninterrupted as if in a single
breath. Were I to characterize this lyrical quality with a single predicate, I might
say: ‘It sounds.’ And that takes me back once more to the spirit of sensuality as
what manifests itself immediately in music.
I realize that even I could say considerably more on this point. I acknowledge
that it would be an easy matter for the experts to make a much better job of
clarifying it. But since no one, as far as I know, has made the attempt or even a
show of doing so, since they all continue to repeat that Mozart’s Don Giovanni is
the crown of all operas but without elaborating on what they mean by that,
although they all say it in a way that clearly shows they mean to say more than
just that Don Giovanni is the best opera, that there is a qualitative difference
between it and all other operas which is nevertheless not to be found in the
absolute relation between idea, form, subject-matter and medium; since, I say,
that is so, then I have broken the silence. Maybe I have been a little too hasty,
maybe I would have succeeded in saying it better had I waited yet a while; I do
not know. But what I do know is that I have not hurried in order to have the
pleasure of speaking, not hurried because I was afraid in case someone more
expert might steal a march on me, but because I feared that if I too kept silent,
the stones would take to speaking in Mozart’s honour, to the shame of every
human being to whom it was given to speak.
What has been said so far I assume is just about enough for this little inquiry,
since its main purpose here is to serve to clear the way for the characterization of
the immediate erotic stages as we get to know them in Mozart. Before going on
to that, however, I would cite a further fact which lets us see the absolute relation
between the spirit of sensuality and the musical from another angle. Music, as
we know, has always been subject to suspicion on the part of religious zealots.
Whether they are right or not does not concern us here since that has only a
religious interest. On the other hand, it is not unimportant to consider what has
brought this about. If I follow the course of religious zealotry in this regard, I
can characterize it quite generally in the following way: the stronger the
religiosity, the more one renounces music and stresses the word. The different
stages in this respect are represented in world history. The final stage excludes
music entirely and abides by the word alone. I could deck out this statement with
a multitude of particular observations. I will not do that but simply cite a few
words from a Presbyterian in one of Achim von Arnim’s stories: ‘We
Presbyterians regard the organ as the devil’s bagpipes which lull serious
reflection to sleep, just as dance benumbs good intentions.’
14 This must be
considered an exemplary remark. But what reason can one have for excluding
music and giving absolute sway to the word? All intelligent sects will admit that,
when misused, the word can confuse the emotions just as much as music. So
there must be some difference in kind. But what religious zeal wants to give
expression to is spirit; so it requires language, which is spirit’s proper medium,
and rejects music, which, for it, is a sensual medium and so far always an
imperfect medium for the expression of spirit. Whether religious zeal is right in
excluding music is, as I said, another question; its view of the relation of music
to language, on the other hand, may be perfectly correct. Music, therefore, need
not be excluded, but we have to realize that in the spiritual realm it is an
imperfect medium, and that therefore, specified as spirit, music cannot have its
absolute object in the immediately spiritual. From this it by no means follows
that one must look upon it as the work of the devil, even if our age provides
much fearful evidence of the demonic power with which music can seize hold of
an individual, and of how this individual can in turn arouse and captivate the
masses, particularly women, in the seductive snares of dread with all the
titillation of voluptuous delight. It by no means follows from this that one must
regard it as the work of the devil, even if one notes with a secret horror how
terribly this art, above all others, often lacerates its votaries, a phenomenon
which oddly enough seems to have escaped the attention of psychologists and
the multitude, except when they are startled now and then by a despairing
individual’s shriek of terror. However, one cannot fail to notice that in the folk
legends, and thus in the popular consciousness these express, the musical is
again the demonic. As an example I can mention the Irish March of the Elves.
15
As for the immediate erotic stages, I owe anything at all I have to say on this
subject to Mozart alone, to whom I owe everything. Since, however, the
comparisons I shall try to make here are based on combinations other than his
and so can only indirectly be ascribed to him, before going to work I have put
myself and the comparisons to the test to find out if I might in any way disturb
the pleasure I and my reader derive from admiring Mozart’s immortal works.
Anyone who wants to see Mozart in his true immortal greatness must turn his
gaze upon Don Giovanni. Compared with that everything else is accidental,
unessential. But then if we look at Don Giovanni in such a way as to see
particular things from Mozart’s other operas from the same point of view, I am
convinced that we shall neither belittle him nor do any harm to ourselves or our
neighbour. We shall then have the chance to rejoice in the fact that music’s real
potential is exhausted in the music of Mozart.
I should add that in using the word ‘stages’ in the above, and in continuing to
use it in what follows, the idea must not be taken in such a literal way as to
imply that each stage exists independently, the one outside the other. I might
perhaps more pertinently use the word ‘metamorphoses’. The different stages
taken together constitute the immediate stage, and this shows that the individual
stages are more like disclosures of predicates, so that all the predicates tumble
down into the wealth of the last stage, since this is the real stage. The other
stages have no independent existence; in themselves they exist only in concept,
and from this one may see their contingent character as against the last stage.
Since, however, they have found separate expression in Mozart’s music, I shall
discuss them separately. Above all, however, one must avoid thinking of them as
different levels of consciousness, since even the last stage has not yet arrived at
consciousness. I am all the time concerned only with the immediate in its sheer
immediacy.
Of course, the difficulties always encountered when one considers music
aesthetically are not to be avoided here either. The difficulty in the foregoing lay
chiefly in the fact that while I wanted to prove through a process of thought that
sensual genius is the proper object of music, really this can only be proved with
music, just as it is only through music itself that I myself have come to an
appreciation of music. The difficulty the following must contend with is really
that since what the music under discussion expresses is essentially music’s
proper object, this music expresses it far more perfectly than does language,
which makes a very poor showing in comparison. Of course, if I had been
concerned with different levels of consciousness, the advantage would be on my
side and that of language, but that is not the case here. So what remains to be
explained can only have meaning for the person who has listened and who
continues constantly to listen. For him it may perhaps contain a suggestion or
two that may move him to listen once more.
First Stage
The first stage is suggested by the Page in Figaro. Of course we should not
see in the Page a particular individual, as we are so easily tempted to when in
imagination or reality we see him represented by a person. For then it would be
difficult to avoid – as is also partly true of the Page in the play – the intrusion of
something accidental, something not relevant to the idea, his becoming more
than he should be; for in a sense that is what he does as soon as he becomes an
individual. But in becoming more he becomes less, he ceases to be the idea. For
that reason no spoken lines can be given to him, music is the only adequate
expression, and one notes accordingly that Figaro as well as Don Giovanni, as
they have come from Mozart’s hand, belong to opera seria.
16 But if we look on
the Page as a mythical figure we shall find what is characteristic of the first stage
expressed in the music.
The sensual awakens, though not to movement but to motionless rest, not to
joy and gladness but to deep melancholy. Desire is not yet awake, it is moodily
hinted at. In desire there is always the desired, which rises out of it and comes to
view in a bewildering twilight. So it is for the sensual: shadows and mists take
the object away, yet its reflections in these bring it nearer. Desire possesses what
will become its object but does so without having desired it, and in that way does
not possess it. That is the painful, but in its sweetness, also captivating and
fascinating contradiction which resounds with its sadness, its melancholy,
through this stage. For the pain of it lies not in there being too little but too
much. The desire is a quiet desire, the longing a quiet longing, the infatuation a
quiet infatuation, in which the object dawns and is so close to it as to be in it.
Desire’s object hovers over the desire, sinks down into it, yet without this
movement occurring through desire’s own power of attraction, or because it is
desired. The object of desire does not fade away; it does not extricate itself from
desire’s embrace, for that would mean that desire was awake; it is desired
without being present to desire, which therefore becomes melancholy precisely
because it cannot reach the point of desiring. As soon as desire awakens, or
rather in and with its awakening, desire and its object are separated; now desire
breathes freely and soundly where previously it could not live and breathe for
the desired. When desire is not awake, the object of desire enchants and entices,
yes, almost frightens it. Desire must have air, it must break out. That happens
with their separation; the object of desire flees blushingly, bashful as a woman, a
separation occurs between them, the desired object disappears et apparet
sublimis,
17 or in any case outside the desire. If one paints the ceiling of a room so
that it is entirely covered with figures, such a ceiling presses down on us, as the
painter says. If, lightly and quickly, one puts just a single figure on it, this ceiling
seems higher. Such is the relation between desire and the desired at a first and at
a later stage.
Accordingly the desire, which at this stage is only there in a presentiment of
itself, is motionless, without disturbance, rocked gently only by an inexplicable
inner motion. As the life of the plant is confined to the earth, so is desire lost in
the present in a quiet longing, engrossed in contemplation, and yet it cannot
evacuate its object, essentially because in a deeper sense no object exists; nor,
however, is its object this lack of an object, for then it would straightaway be in
motion; it would be specified if in no other way then in sorrow and pain, but
sorrow and pain do not have in them that contradiction which is characteristic of
melancholy and depression, do not have that ambiguity which is the sweetness
of melancholy. Although desire is at this stage not specified as such, although
this presentiment of desire, as far as its object goes, is entirely undetermined,
still it has one specification, that is, it is infinitely deep. Like Thor, it sucks
through a horn whose other end is the ocean,
18 yet the reason why it cannot suck
its object up into itself is not that the latter is infinite, but that this infinitude
cannot be an object for it. Its sucking therefore does not indicate a relation to the
object but is identical with its sigh, and this is infinitely deep.
In harmony with the description given here of the first stage, we will find it
very significant that, musically, the part of the Page is pitched to suit a woman’s
voice. What is contradictory with the stage is as though intimated by this
contradiction; the desire is so indeterminate, the object so little separated, that
the desired rests androgynously in the desire, just as in plant-life the male and
female occupy one blossom. Desire and the object desired are joined in this
unity; they are both neuter in gender.
Although the line does not belong to the mythical Page but to the Page in the
piece, the poetic figure Cherubino, and although for this reason we cannot
consider it in this connection, since for one thing it is not Mozart’s and for
another it expresses something quite different from what we are talking about
here, I would nevertheless highlight one particular line because it allows me to
describe this stage in analogy to a later one. Susanna mocks Cherubino because
he is also in love, in a way, with Marcellina, and the only answer the Page has to
offer is, ‘She is a woman’. Regarding the Page in the play, it is essential that he
should fall in love with the Countess, unessential that he should fall in love with
Marcellina, that being only an indirect and paradoxical expression for the
intensity of the passion binding him to the Countess. Regarding the mythical
Page, it is equally essential that he should be in love with Marcellina as with the
Countess; his object is womanliness, and the Countess and Marcellina have this
in common. So when we later hear of Don Giovanni:
Even coquettes threescore years old
With joy he adds them to the roll,
19
we have the perfect analogy to this, except that the intensity and definiteness
of the desire are far more developed.
If I were to try to specify in a single predicate the special quality of Mozart’s
music with regard to the Page in Figaro, I would say ‘drunk with love’. But like
all intoxication, being drunk with love can work in two ways, either making the
joy of life increasingly transparent or compressing it into an opaque dejection.
The latter is the case with the music here, and rightly so. Music cannot give the
reason, that is beyond its power. Words are unable to express the mood itself, it
is too heavy, too ponderous, for words to carry; only music can express it. The
reason for its melancholy lies in the profound inner contradiction that we have
tried to call attention to in the foregoing.
We now leave the first stage, represented by the mythical Page; we let him go
on dejectedly dreaming of what he has, continue in his melancholy yearning for
what he possesses. He never gets any further, he never gets going, for his
movements are illusory and hence he makes none. It is another matter with the
Page in the play. We would like to have a truly and genuinely friendly interest in
his future; we congratulate him on having become a captain, we let him kiss
Susanna once more in farewell, we shall not let on about the mark on his
forehead, which none can see who aren’t in the know,
20 but no more than this,
my good Cherubino, or we shall call the Count, and he will shout, ‘Be off with
you, out with you, to your regiment! He’s no child, as no one knows better than
myself!’
Second Stage
This stage is represented by Papageno in The Magic Flute. Here, too, of
course we must separate the essential from the accidental, evoke the mythical
Papageno and forget the actual person in the play, particularly because this figure
has become involved in all sorts of dubious gibberish. In this respect it might be
not without interest to go through the whole opera in order to show that, as far as
opera is concerned, its subject-matter is deeply flawed. One would then also gain
an opportunity to illuminate the erotic from a new angle, through noticing how
the attempt to invest it with a deeper ethical view, which allows it to try its hand
at all sorts of weighty dialectical ordeals, is a venture that has gone quite beyond
the boundaries of music, so that even for a Mozart it has been impossible to lend
it any deeper interest. This opera’s definitive direction is to be found in that
which is not musical about it, and so, in spite of some individually perfect
concert numbers and affecting utterances, it is by no means a classic opera. But
none of this can occupy us in the present little inquiry. We are concerned only
with Papageno; which, however, is a great advantage if for no other reason than
that it excuses us from every attempt to explain the meaning of Papageno’s
relationship to Tamino, a relationship which the plot makes out to be so
profound and thoughtful that it becomes well-nigh unthinkable for sheer
thoughtfulness.
This treatment of The Magic Flute may seem arbitrary to some readers,
because it sees both too much in Papageno and too little in the rest of the opera;
they may not approve of our procedure. The reason is their disagreement with us
on the point of departure for any consideration of Mozart’s music. That, in our
view, is of course Don Giovanni, and it is also our conviction that it is by seeing
several things from the other operas in relation to it that one shows most piety
towards Mozart, although I would not thereby deny the importance of making
each individual opera an object of special consideration.
Desire awakens, and as one always first realizes one has been dreaming at the
moment of waking, so here too the dream is over. This arousal in which desire
awakens, this tremor, separates desire and its object, gives the desire an object.
This is a dialectical feature which must be kept sharply in mind; only when the
object exists does the desire exist; desire and its object are twins neither of which
enters the world a fraction of an instant before the other. Yet though they enter it
at exactly the same moment, and not even with the time interval that can
separate other twins, the importance of their coming into existence in this way is
not that they are united but, on the contrary, that they are separated. But this, the
sensual movement, this earthquake, for a moment splits the desire and its object
infinitely asunder; but as the principle of motion appears for a moment to
separate, so it reveals itself again as wishing to unite the separated elements. The
consequence of the separation is that desire is plucked out of its substantial
repose within itself, and the object as a result no longer comes under the
category of substance, but splits up into a multiplicity.
As the life of the plant is bound to earth, so is the first stage confined in
substantial longing. Desire awakens. The object takes flight, revealing its
multiplicity, the longing breaks loose from the soil and goes out a-wandering; the
flower gets wings and flutters erratically and tirelessly hither and thither. Desire
is directed towards the object, at the same time stirring within itself, the heart
beats soundly and happily, the objects swiftly vanish and appear, yet before
every disappearance is a present enjoyment, a moment of contact, short but
blessed, incandescent like a glow-worm, fickle and fleeting like the touch of a
butterfly, and as harmless; countless kisses, but so swiftly savoured that it is as if
only all that was taken from one object was what was given to the next. Only
momentarily is a deeper desire hinted at, but this hint is forgotten. In Papageno
desire aims at discoveries. This delight in discovery is what pulsates in it, is its
animation. It does not find the real object of this search, but it discovers the
multiplicity through searching within it for the object it seeks to discover. Desire
is thus awake but not yet specified as desire. If we remember that desire is
present in all three stages, we can say that in the first stage it is specified as
dreaming, in the second as seeking, in the third as desiring. The seeking desire is
not yet desiring; what it seeks is only what it can desire but it does not desire it.
So perhaps the most apposite description is, ‘It discovers’. If we compare
Papageno with Don Giovanni in this respect, the latter’s journey through the
world is something more than a voyage of discovery; he savours not just the
adventure of travelling to discover, he is a knight who goes out to conquer (veni,
vidi, vici).
21 Discovery and conquest are here identical; indeed in a sense one can
say that he forgets the discovery in the conquest, or that the discovery lies behind
him, and he therefore leaves it to his servant and secretary Leporello, who keeps
a list in a quite different sense from that in which I might imagine Papageno
keeping accounts. Papageno picks out, Don Giovanni enjoys, Leporello checks.
I can indeed represent in thought the special character of this, as of every
stage, but only in the instant it has ceased to exist. But even if I could describe
its peculiarity perfectly and explain the reason for it, there would still always be
something left over which I cannot say and yet wants to be heard. It is too
immediate to be grasped in words. So, too, with Papageno, it is the same song,
the same melody; he sets off again from the beginning as soon as he has
finished, and so on continually. It might be objected that it is impossible in any
case to express anything immediate. And in a sense that is quite true, but in the
first place it is in language that the immediacy of the spirit has its immediate
expression, and second, in so far as the intervention of thought brings any
change here, being spirit’s qualification it nevertheless stays essentially the
same. Here, however, it is an immediacy of the sensual, which as such has quite
another medium, where consequently the disproportion between the media
makes the impossibility absolute.
If I were now to try to indicate in a single phrase the special character of
Mozart’s music in the part of the work that interests us, I would say that it is
merrily chirping, vigorous, sparkling with love. What I would stress in particular
are the first aria and the chime of bells. The duet with Pamina, and later with
Papagena, fall entirely outside the category of immediate musicality. But if one
considers the first aria, one will surely approve of the predicates I have used and,
if one pays closer attention to it, find also an opportunity to see what
significance the musical element has, how it presents itself as the absolute
expression of the idea, and how the latter is accordingly an immediately musical
idea. As you know, Papageno accompanies his light-hearted cheerfulness on the
flute. Every ear has certainly felt strangely moved by this accompaniment. But
the more one considers it, and the more one sees the mythical Papageno in
Papageno, the more expressive and characteristic one will find it; one doesn’t
tire of hearing it again and again, because it is an absolutely adequate expression
of Papageno’s whole life; Papageno, whose life is an incessant twittering of this
kind, who, constantly carefree, chirps on in all idleness, and who is happy and
pleased because this is the content of his life, happy in his work and happy in his
song. As you know, things are arranged so very profoundly in the opera that the
flutes of Tamino and Papageno correspond with each other. Yet what a
difference! Tamino’s flute, from which the opera nevertheless takes its name,
entirely fails of its effect. And why? Because Tamino is simply not a musical
figure. This is part of the misconceived plot of the opera as a whole. Tamino
becomes exceedingly tiresome and sentimental on his flute; and when one
considers the rest of his development, his state of consciousness, one cannot help
but think, every time he takes up his flute and plays a piece on it, of the farmer in
Horace (rusticus exspectat, dum defluat amnis),
22 except that Horace hasn’t
given his farmer a flute for an unprofitable pastime. As a dramatic figure,
Tamino is entirely beyond the musical, just as the spiritual development which
the plot aims at realizing is in any case a totally unmusical idea. Tamino, indeed,
has reached the point where the musical ceases, so his fluteplaying is only a
time-waster to drive away thought. For banishing thoughts is something music is
supremely capable of, even evil thoughts, as indeed we say of David that his
playing exorcised Saul’s evil spirit.
23 On the other hand, a big deception lies
implicit in this idea, for it does that only in so far as it carries consciousness back
into immediacy and lulls it therein. The individual may therefore indeed feel
happy in the moment of intoxication, but he only becomes the more unhappy.
Quite parenthetically I permit myself an observation here. We have used music
to heal the mentally disordered; in a sense we have also achieved our purpose,
and yet it is an illusion. For when madness has a mental cause, it is always the
result of the hardening of one or another point in consciousness. This hardening
must be overcome, but for it truly to be overcome, one must go in quite the
opposite direction from music. To employ music is to go altogether the wrong
way and make the patient still more insane, even if he seems no longer to be so.
I can just as well let what I have said here about Tamino’s fluteplaying stand,
without fear of seeing it misunderstood. I don’t mean to deny what has several
times been conceded, that music can have its significance as an accompaniment,
entering as it does, in that case, an alien sphere – that of language. The fault in
The Magic Flute, however, is that the whole work is biased towards
consciousness, and its tendency is therefore to do away with music while still
remaining an opera; and not even this thought is made clear in the piece. The
goal of its plot is ethically qualified love, or married love, and that is where the
basic fault of the play lies. For let marriage be, ecclesiastically or secularly, what
it will; one thing it is not, it is not musical; indeed it is absolutely unmusical.
So, musically, the first aria has its great significance through being the
immediate-musical expression of Papageno’s whole life, and any history that
finds its absolutely adequate expression in music is history only in a figurative
sense. The chime of bells, on the other hand, is the musical expression of his
activity, of which again one can only form an idea through music; it is
enchanting, tempting, seductive, like the playing of the man who caused the fish
to pause and listen.
24
The lines, for which either Schikaneder or the Danish translator is responsible,
are in general so crazy and stupid that it is almost inconceivable that Mozart
brought as much out of them as he did. Letting Papageno say ‘I am a child of
Nature’, and thus the same instant make himself a liar, may be taken as an
example instar omnium [‘as good as any’]. An exception might be made of the
words of the text in the first aria, about him putting the maidens he catches in his
cage. That is, if one puts a little more into them than the author himself
presumably has, they demonstrate precisely the inoffensive character of
Papageno’s activity, as we have indicated it above.
We now leave the mythical Papageno. The actual Papageno’s fate need not
concern us. We wish him joy with his little Papagena, and gladly let him seek his
happiness in populating a primitive forest, or an entire continent, with nothing
but Papagenos.
Third Stage
This stage is represented by Don Giovanni. Here I have no need, as above, to
single out a particular section of the opera. The question here is one of
summating, not separating, since the entire opera is essentially an expression of
the idea and, except for one or two individual numbers, it pivots essentially upon
that, gravitating with dramatic necessity towards the idea at its centre. So there is
an opportunity, once again, to see in what sense I can call the preceding ‘stages’
by that name when I call the third stage Don Giovanni. I have already reminded
you that they have no separate existence, and when one takes this third stage,
which is really the whole stage, as one’s point of departure, they are less easily
seen as one-sided abstractions or provisional anticipations, but rather as
presentiments of Don Giovanni, except that there is always something left
behind, which more or less justifies my using the expression ‘stage’, in that they
are one-sided presentiments, each of them intimating one side only.
The contradiction in the first stage lay in the fact that desire could acquire no
object, but was in possession of its object without having desired it, and
therefore could not reach the point of desiring. In the second stage, the object
appears in its multiplicity, but since desire seeks its object in this multiplicity, in
a deeper sense it still has no object, it is not yet specified as desire. In Don
Giovanni, on the other hand, desire is specified absolutely as desire, is
connotationally and extensionally the immediate unity of the two preceding
stages. The first stage desired the One ideally; the second desired the particular
under the category of the multiple; the third stage is the unity of these. In the
particular, desire has its absolute object, it desires the particular absolutely.
Herein lies the seductiveness of which we shall speak later. Desire in this stage is
therefore absolutely sound, victorious, triumphant, irresistible, and demonic. It
must of course not be forgotten, therefore, that it is not a question here of desire
in a particular individual but of desire as a principle, spiritually specified as that
which spirit excludes. This is the idea of the spirit of sensuality, as was also
intimated above. The expression of this idea is Don Giovanni, and the expression
of Don Giovanni is, again, solely music. It is these two considerations in
particular which will be constantly highlighted from different angles in what
follows, from which also the proof will be indirectly furnished for this opera’s
classic significance. To make it easier for the reader to keep an overview,
however, I shall attempt to collect the scattered considerations under particular
headings.
To present some unitary view of this music is not my intention, and in
particular I shall, with the support of all good spirits, take care not to scare
together a mass of platitudinous but very noisy predicates, or to betray in
linguistic lasciviousness the impotence of language, the more so since I do not
regard this impotence as an imperfection in language but as a high potency, yet
am therefore also the more willing to recognize music within its own limits.
What I do want to do, on the other hand, is in part to illuminate the idea from as
many angles as possible, and its relation to language, and in this way constantly
encompass more and more of the territory in which music has its home, scaring
it into breaking cover, as it were, though without my being able to say more
about it, once it can be heard, than, ‘Listen!’ […] [Nor shall I] give a running
commentary on the music, for really that can only contain subjective
contingencies and idiosyncrasies and can only appeal to something
corresponding in the reader. […] What I shall do, however, is constantly ferret
out the musical in the idea, the situation, etc., hear it out, and when I have
brought the reader to the point of being musically receptive enough to seem to
hear the music although hearing nothing, I have completed my task, I make
myself mute, I say to the reader as to myself: listen! You friendly genii who
protect all innocent love, to you I commit all my faculties, watch over the busy
thoughts that they may be found worthy of their object, fashion my soul into a
euphonious instrument, let the gentle breezes of eloquence pass swiftly over it,
send the refreshment and blessing of fruitful moods! You righteous spirits who
stand guard at the boundaries in the realm of beauty, watch over me lest, in
muddled enthusiasm and a blind zeal to make Don Giovanni all, I do not do it
injustice, demean it, make it something other than it really is, which is the
highest! You powerful spirits who know how to stir the heart of man, stand by
me that I may capture the reader, not in the net of passion, nor the artifices of
eloquence, but in the eternal truth of conviction.
1. Sensual Genius Specified as Seduction
When the Don Juan idea originated is not known;
25 all we know is that it
belongs to Christianity, and through Christianity it belongs in turn to the Middle
Ages. If one were unable to trace back the idea in human consciousness to that
period of world history with any degree of certainty, a consideration of the inner
nature of the idea would immediately dispel any doubt. The Middle Ages in
general embody the idea of representation, partly consciously, partly
unconsciously; the total is represented in a single individual, yet in such a way
that only one aspect is determined as totality. The single individual who
epitomizes the totality is therefore both more and less than an individual.
Alongside this individual stands another individual who just as totally represents
another side of life’s content, as with the knight and the scholastic, the
ecclesiastic and the layman. The grand dialectic of life is thus invariably
illustrated by representative individuals, who more often than not confront each
other in pairs; life is always presented only in one aspect, and there is no hint of
the great dialectical unity which embraces life under both aspects.
26 The
oppositions therefore usually stand, indifferently, outside each other. Of all this
the Middle Ages knew nothing. Thus they themselves realized the representative
idea unconsciously, while only a later reflection sees in them the idea. If the
Middle Ages posit for their own consciousness an individual as representative of
the idea, then they usually posit at his side another individual in relation to him.
This relationship is then generally a comic one, where the one individual as it
were compensates for the disproportionate greatness of the other in actual life.
Thus the king has his fool by his side, Faust has his Wagner, Don Quixote
Sancho Panza, and Don Giovanni Leporello. This arrangement, too, belongs
essentially to the Middle Ages.
Thus the idea belongs to the Middle Ages; it is not, in the Middle Ages, the
property of a single poet, it is one of those ideas with a primal power that spring
from the popular consciousness with primordial aboriginality. The Middle Ages
had to make the discord between flesh and spirit, which Christianity introduced
to the world, a subject of their consideration, and to that end they made the
contending forces individual objects of intuition. So Don Juan is, dare I say,
flesh incarnate, or the inspiration of the flesh by the flesh’s own spirit. This is
already sufficiently emphasized in the foregoing; the question I would call
attention to here, however, is whether we ought to refer Don Juan to the earlier
or later Middle Ages. That he stands in an essential relation to the Middle Ages
is surely evident to everyone. Either he is, then, the dissenting, misunderstood
anticipation of the erotic that was manifest in the knight errant, or chivalry is an
as yet merely relative contrast to the spirit, and only when the opposition became
still sharper did Don Juan appear as the sensual which opposes the spirit at all
costs. The erotic of the age of chivalry bears a certain resemblance to that of the
Greek consciousness; the latter is, like the former, specified as soul. The
difference is that the soul specification here lies within a general specification of
the spirit, or a specification of totality. The idea of femininity is constantly in
motion, in many ways, which was not the case with the Greeks, where all were
simply beautiful individuals with no hint of femininity as such. In the
consciousness of the Middle Ages, too, the erotic of the knight had a rather
conciliatory relation to the spiritual, even if the spiritual in its jealous austerity
held it in suspicion. If one now supposes the principle of the spirit to be posited
in the world, one can either imagine that the most glaring contrast, the most
titanic disjunction came first, and later was gradually mitigated, in which case
Don Juan belongs to the earlier Middle Ages; or, assuming instead that the
relation developed progressively into this absolute opposition, as is also more
natural, the spirit taking more and more of its shares out of the joint firm so as to
act alone, whereupon the real skandalon
27 appears, then Don Juan belongs to the
later Middle Ages.
We are led on then to that point in time where the Middle Ages are about to
come to an end, and where we meet a related idea, namely Faust – except that
Don Juan must be placed a little earlier. As the spirit, exclusively specified as
spirit, renounces this world, feels that this is not simply not its home but not
even its scene of action, and withdraws up into the higher regions, it leaves the
worldly behind as the arena for the power with which it has always lived in
conflict and for which it now steps aside. As the spirit then frees itself from the
world, sensuality appears in all its power; it offers no objection to the change, it
too sees the advantage in being separated, and rejoices that the Church does not
prevail on them to stay together, but hews asunder the bond that binds them.
Stronger than ever before, sensuality now awakens in all its richness, in all its
rapture and exultation, and just as that recluse in nature, the reticent echo that
never speaks first to anyone or speaks without being asked, found such great
pleasure in the knight’s hunting horn and his love ballads, in the baying of
hounds, the snorting of horses, that it never tired of repeating these over and over
again and, in the end, completely under its breath, so as not to forget them, so the
whole world became an abode for sensuality’s worldly spirit, echoing from all
sides, while the spirit had abandoned the world. The Middle Ages have as much
to say of a mountain not found on any map; it is called Venusberg.
28 There the
sensual has its home, there it has its wild pleasures, for it is a kingdom, a state.
In this kingdom language has no home, nor thought’s sobriety, nor the laborious
business of reflection. All one hears there is the elemental voice of passion, the
play of the appetites, the wild din of intoxication; indulgence, only, in an eternal
tumult. The first-born of this kingdom is Don Juan. This is not yet to say that it
is the realm of sin, for we must grasp it at the moment when it appears in
aesthetic indifference. Not until reflection enters does it present itself as the
realm of sin, but then Don Juan is slain, the music comes to an end, one sees
only the despairing defiance which impotently casts its negative vote but can
find no constituency, not even in musical sounds. When sensuality presents itself
as what is to be excluded, as what the spirit will have nothing to do with, though
still without the latter’s having passed judgement on it or condemned it, then the
sensual assumes the form of the demonic in aesthetic indifference. It is just a
matter of a moment; soon everything is changed; then the music too has ceased.
Faust and Don Juan are the Titans and giants of the Middle Ages, who although
no different from those of antiquity in the grandeur of their endeavours, certainly
differ from them in standing in isolation, in not combining their forces before
storming heaven. All the power is gathered in just one individual.
Don Juan, consequently, is the expression of the demonic specified as the
sensual; Faust is the expression of the demonic specified as the spiritual which
the Christian spirit excludes. These ideas are essentially related to each other,
and they bear many similarities; one might therefore expect them to have in
common that both are preserved in legends. We know this is true of Faust. […]
But no such legend is to be found concerning Don Juan. […] There has probably
been a legend all the same, but in all likelihood it has been confined to just a few
hints. […] It is well known that Don Juan existed far back in time as a booththeatre piece. Indeed, that may very likely be its origin. But there the idea was
conceived comically; remarkable as it is in general how proficient the Middle
Ages were in furnishing ideals, they could equally be relied on to see the comic
side of the larger-than-life dimensions of the ideal. To make Don Juan a braggart
who imagined he had seduced every girl, to let Leporello believe his lies, was
surely not an entirely infelicitous basis for comedy. And even if that is not how it
was, even if that was not the conception, still the comic twist could not have
failed to turn up, since it lies in the contradiction between the hero and the
theatre he moves within. Thus one may also let the Middle Ages tell of heroes so
powerfully built that their eyes were a foot apart, but if an ordinary person were
to come on stage and pretend to have eyes a foot apart, the comic would be in
full swing.
These remarks on the legend of Don Juan would have found no place here had
they not served some closer relation to the subject under investigation, if they
did not serve to direct thought to the once determined goal. I imagine that the
reason why this idea, compared with that of Faust, has so poor a past has to do
with the fact that so long as nobody realized that music was its proper medium,
there was something mysterious in it. Faust is idea, but an idea which is also
essentially individual. To imagine the spiritualdemonic concentrated in an
individual is the prerogative of thought, while to conceive the sensual in an
individual is impossible. Don Giovanni constantly hovers between being idea –
that is to say, energy, life – and individual. But this hovering is the vibrating of
music. When the sea is agitated the foaming waves form images, as though
creatures, in this upheaval. It is as if these creatures set the waves in motion, and
yet it is the contrary action of the waves which creates them. Similarly, Don
Giovanni is an image that constantly appears but gains neither form nor
substance, an individual who is constantly being formed but not finished, of
whose life history one can form no more definite an impression than one can by
listening to the tumult of the waves. When Don Giovanni is conceived in this
way, there is meaning and profound significance in everything. If I imagine
some particular individual, if I see him or hear him speak, it becomes comic that
he has seduced 1,003; as soon as he is a particular individual the accent falls in
quite another place, for now it is those whom he has seduced, and in what
manner, that are highlighted. The naivety of ballads and popular belief can
successfully express such things without a suspicion of the comical; for
reflection that is impossible. When he is interpreted in music, on the other hand,
I do not have a particular individual, I have the power of nature, the demonic,
which as little tires of seducing, or is done with seducing, as the wind is tired of
raging, the sea of surging, or a waterfall of cascading down from its height. In
this respect, the number of the seduced might just as well be any number at all,
or a far greater one. Often it is not an easy task, when translating the text of an
opera, to do it so exactly that the translation is not merely singable but also
harmonizes reasonably with the textual meaning and thus with the music. To
illustrate how sometimes this may not matter at all, I can mention the number in
the list in Don Giovanni without treating the matter as offhandedly as people
usually do and taking such things to have nothing to do with the matter. On the
contrary, aesthetically I take the matter extremely seriously, and that is the
reason I think it unimportant. I would, however, commend one feature of this
number 1,003: it is odd and accidental, which is not at all unimportant, for it
gives the impression that the list is by no means closed, but on the contrary that
Don Giovanni is on the move. One almost begins to pity Leporello who has not
only, as he says himself, to stand watch outside the door, but to carry on so
complicated a system of book-keeping withal that it could keep a practised
departmental secretary busy.
The way in which sensuality is conceived in Don Giovanni – as a principle – is
one in which it has never been conceived before; for this reason the erotic is also
defined by another predicate: the erotic here is seduction. Curiously enough, the
idea of a seducer is entirely absent in the Greek consciousness. Far be it from me
to want to praise the Greeks on that account, for gods as well as men were
notoriously indiscreet in their love affairs; nor do I criticize Christianity, for after
all it has the idea only as something external to it. The reason why the Greek
consciousness lacks this idea is that its whole life is specified as individuality.
The aspect of soul is thus predominant or always in harmony with the sensual.
Greek love, therefore, was of the soul, not sensual, and it is this that inspires the
modesty which rests over all Greek love. They fell in love with a girl, they set
heaven and earth in motion to possess her; when they succeeded, perhaps they
tired of her and sought a new love. In their inconstancy they may, indeed, bear a
certain resemblance to Don Giovanni and, to mention just one example,
Hercules could surely produce a fairsized list, considering that he sometimes
helped himself to families numbering up to fifty daughters, and like a family
son-in-law, according to some reports, had his way with all of them in a single
night. Still, he differs essentially from Don Giovanni; he is no seducer. For when
one considers Greek love, it is according to its own lights essentially faithful just
because it is of the soul; and it is some accidental factor in the particular
individual that he loves many, and with regard to the many he loves, it is again
accidental every time he loves a new one; when he is in love with one he does
not think of the next. Don Giovanni, on the other hand, is from tip to toe a
seducer. His love is not of the soul but sensual, and sensual love is not according
to its own lights faithful but absolutely faithless; it loves not one but all, that is to
say, it seduces all. For it exists only in the moment, but the moment, in terms of
its concept, is the sum of moments, and so we have the seducer.
Chivalrous love, too, is of the soul and, therefore, according to its own lights
essentially faithful; only sensual love is, in its own lights, essentially faithless.
But this, its faithlessness, manifests itself also in another way; it becomes simply
a repetition. Love from the soul is dialectical in a twofold sense. In the first
place, it has in it the doubt and disquiet as to whether it will also be happy, see
its desire fulfilled, and be requited. This anxiety is something sensual love does
not have. Even a Jupiter has doubts about his victory, and this cannot be
otherwise; indeed, he himself cannot wish it otherwise. With Don Giovanni this
is not the case; he cuts matters short and must always be considered absolutely
victorious. This might seem an advantage to him, but it is really an
impoverishment. Love from the soul has, secondly, yet another dialectic, for it
differs in relation to every single individual who is the object of love. Therein
lies its wealth, its full-bodied content. Such is not the case with Don Giovanni.
He has no time for this, for him everything is merely a matter of the moment. To
catch sight of her and love her, that was one and the same. In a sense one may
say the same of love from the soul, but in that there is also just the suggestion of
a beginning. For Don Giovanni it is true in a different way. To catch sight of her
and to love her are the same thing, that is in the moment; the very same moment
everything is over, and the same endlessly repeats itself.
If one imagines Don Giovanni specified as soul, it becomes ridiculous and a
self-contradiction, not even in accord with the idea, to posit 1,003 in Spain. It
becomes an exaggeration which has a disturbing effect even if one were to
entertain the fancy that one was considering him in an ideal way. If then we have
no other medium for describing this love than language, we are at a loss, for as
soon as we abandon the naivety that can insist, in all innocence, that there were
1,003 in Spain, we need something more, namely the individualization in soul.
The aesthetic is not at all satisfied that everything should be thus lumped
together, and wants to astonish with numbers. Love from the soul moves
precisely in the rich multiplicity of the individual life, where the nuances are
what are really significant. Sensual love, on the other hand, can lump everything
together. What is essential for it is woman quite in the abstract, and at most
distinctions of the more sensual kind. Love from the soul is a continuation in
time, sensual love a disappearance in time, but the medium which expresses this
is precisely music. This is something music is excellently fitted to accomplish,
since it is far more abstract than language and therefore does not express the
particular but the general in all its generality, and yet it expresses the general, not
in reflective abstraction, but in the concreteness of immediacy.
As an example of what I mean, I shall discuss in a little more detail the
servant’s second aria: the aria listing the seduced. This may be regarded as Don
Giovanni’s real epic. So make this experiment if you doubt the truth of what I
say! Imagine a poet more happily endowed by nature than any before him, give
him an abundance of expression, give him mastery and authority of the forces of
language, let everything in which there is the breath of life be obedient to him,
deferring to his slightest gesture, let everything wait in readiness for his
command, let him be surrounded by a numerous band of light skirmishers, fleetfooted messengers who overtake thought in its swiftest flight, let nothing escape
him, not the slightest movement, let there be no secret left for him, nothing
unutterable, in all the world – then give him the task of celebrating Don
Giovanni epically in song, of unfolding the list of the seduced. What will be the
result? He will never be finished! The epic has the defect, if you will, that it can
go on as long as needs must; his hero, the improviser, Don Giovanni, can go on
as long as needs must. The poet will then enter into the multiplicity, there will
always be enough there to give pleasure but he will never achieve the effect that
Mozart has obtained. For even if he finally finished, he would not have said the
half of what Mozart has expressed in this one piece. Now Mozart has not even
embarked upon the multiplicity; what he deals with are certain large
configurations of passing events. This has its sufficient reason in the very
medium, in music, which is too abstract to express the differences. The musical
epic thus becomes something comparatively short, and yet it has in an
incomparable manner the epic quality of going on as long as need be, since one
can always let it begin again and hear it over and over again, precisely because it
expresses the general in the concreteness of immediacy. This is not Don
Giovanni as a particular individual that we hear, not his speech, but we hear the
voice, the voice of sensuality, and we hear it through the longing for femininity.
The only way in which Don Giovanni can become epic is by constantly finishing
and constantly starting over again, for his life is the sum of mutually repellent
moments that lack any coherence; his life is as moment the sum of moments, as
sum of moments the moment.
In this generality, in this hovering between being individual and force of
nature, lies Don Giovanni. As soon as he becomes individual the aesthetic
acquires quite different categories. Therefore it is quite proper, and has a deep
inner significance, that in the seduction that occurs in the piece, that of Zerlina,
the girl should be a common peasant girl. Hypocritical aestheticians who, under
the show of understanding poets and composers, do all they can to help us
misunderstand them, will perhaps instruct us that Zerlina is an uncommon girl.
Anyone who thinks that shows that he has totally misunderstood Mozart and is
using the wrong categories. That he misunderstands Mozart is clear enough, for
Mozart has been at pains to keep Zerlina as insignificant as possible. […] If Don
Giovanni’s love were specified other than as sensual, if he were a seducer in a
spiritual sense (something which will be a subject for consideration later), then it
would have been a radical fault in the piece that the heroine in the seduction
which dramatically engages us is a little peasant girl. The aesthetic would
require that Don Juan be set a more difficult task. But for Don Giovanni these
differences are of no importance. If I could imagine him making such a speech
about himself, perhaps he’d say, ‘You are wrong, I am no husband who needs an
ordinary girl for my happiness; every girl has what makes me happy, and so I
take them all.’ It is in a similar way that we must understand the words I touched
on earlier, ‘Even coquettes threescore years old’, or in another place: pur chè
porti la gonella, voi sapete quel chè fà.
29 For Don Giovanni every girl is an
ordinary girl, every love affair an everyday story. Zerlina is young and pretty,
and she is a woman, that is the peculiarity she shares with hundreds of others,
but it is not the uncommon that Don Giovanni desires but the general, what she
has in common with every woman. If that is not how it is, then Don Giovanni
ceases to be absolutely musical, the aesthetic calls for spoken lines; but then
since that is indeed how it is, Don Giovanni is absolutely musical.
I will throw light on this from another side too, from the inner structure of the
piece. For Don Giovanni, Elvira is a dangerous enemy. This is frequently
stressed in the dialogue we owe to the Danish translator. Sure enough, it is a
mistake to give him spoken lines, but that doesn’t mean that the lines might not
include the occasional good comment. Thus Don Giovanni is afraid of Elvira.
Now presumably some aesthetician thinks he can give a meticulous explanation
of this with some longwinded chit-chat about Elvira’s being an uncommon girl,
etc. This misses the point entirely. She is a danger to him because she has been
seduced. In the same sense, exactly the same sense, Zerlina is a danger to him
when she is seduced. As soon as she is seduced she is lifted up into a higher
sphere, which is a consciousness in her that Don Giovanni himself does not
have. Therefore she is a danger. Thus, again, it is not through the accidental but
the general that she is dangerous for him.
So Don Giovanni is a seducer; his eroticism is seduction. This says much if
understood aright, little if grasped with typical lack of clarity. We have already
seen that the concept of a seducer is essentially modified in the case of Don
Giovanni, as the object of his desire is the sensual and that alone. This was
important for showing the musical in Don Giovanni. In antiquity the sensual
found expression in the silent stillness of plastic art; in the Christian world the
sensual had to fume in all its impatient passion. Although one can thus truly say
that Don Giovanni is a seducer, this expression, which can have a disturbing
effect on the weak brains of certain aestheticians, has often occasioned
misunderstanding, inasmuch as they have scraped together whatever could be
said of such a one and transferred it without further ado to Don Giovanni. At
times they have demonstrated their own cunning in running Don Giovannis to
earth, at others talked themselves hoarse explaining his intrigues and wiles; in
short the word ‘seducer’ has given everyone the chance to do him down as best
they can, to contribute their mite
30
to the total misunderstanding. Of Don
Giovanni we must use the word ‘seducer’ with great caution, in so far, that is, as
it is more incumbent on us to say something true than just anything. This is not
because Don Giovanni is too good, but because he simply doesn’t come within
ethical categories. I would therefore rather call him a deceiver, since there is
always a greater ambiguity in that word. Being a seducer requires always a
certain reflection and consciousness, and once this is present one may talk of
cunning and intrigues, and of wily measures. This consciousness is something
Don Giovanni lacks. So he does not seduce. He desires, and this desire acts
seductively. To that extent he seduces. He savours the satisfaction of desire; as
soon as he has savoured it he seeks a new object, and so on endlessly. So he does
indeed deceive, though not in such a way that he plans his deception in advance;
it is the power of sensuality itself that deceives the seduced, and it is more of a
kind of Nemesis. He desires and stays constantly in a state of desire, and he
constantly savours its satisfaction. To be a seducer he lacks the time ahead in
which to lay his plans, and the time behind in which to become conscious of his
act. A seducer should therefore be in possession of a power which Don Giovanni
does not have, however well equipped he is otherwise – the power of speech. As
soon as we give him that power he ceases to be musical, and then the aesthetic
interest becomes quite another.
Achim von Arnim tells somewhere of a seducer in quite another style, a
seducer who falls under ethical categories. Of him he uses a form of expression
which, in its truth, boldness and pithiness, can almost match a stroke of the bow
in Mozart. He says he could talk with a woman in such a way that, if the devil
caught him, he could talk himself free if only he was given a chance to talk with
the devil’s great-grandmother.
31 This is the real seducer; the aesthetic interest
here is also different; namely, how, the method. There is therefore something of
profound significance in what has perhaps escaped most people’s attention, that
Faust, who is a reproduction of Don Giovanni, seduces only one girl, while Don
Giovanni seduces hundreds; but then this one girl is, in terms of intensity,
seduced and destroyed in quite another way from all those whom Don Giovanni
has deceived. Simply because Faust, as a reproduction, has in him the category
of spirit. The power of such a seducer is speech, that is to say, lies. A few days
ago I heard one soldier speak to another about a third who had deceived a girl.
He gave no extensive description, yet the expression he used was quite excellent:
‘He were able to do such with lies and such.’ This seducer is of quite another
kind than Don Giovanni and differs essentially from him, as can be seen from
the fact that he and his activity are extremely unmusical and aesthetically belong
in the category of the interesting. The object of his desire is therefore, if one has
the right aesthetic conception of him, also something more than the merely
sensual.
But what is this force with which Don Giovanni seduces? It is the force of
desire, the energy of sensual desire. In each woman he desires the whole of
femininity, and in this lies the sensually idealizing power with which he at once
beautifies and overcomes his prey. The reflection of this gigantic passion
beautifies and unfolds the desired, it irradiates a heightened beauty with its
refulgence. As, with a seductive glow, the enthusiast’s flame illumines even
those not concerned, so Don Giovanni transfigures every girl in a far deeper
sense, since his relation to her is essential. So for him all finite differences fade
away in comparison with the main thing: being a woman. The older women he
rejuvenates into womanhood’s beautiful middle age; children he practically
matures in a twinkling; all that is woman is his prey (pur chè porti la gonella,
voi sapete quel chè fà). On the other hand, it would be quite wrong to take his
sensuality for blindness; instinctively he knows very well how to make
distinctions, and above all he idealizes. If for a moment I think back to a
preceding stage, to the Page, the reader may recall that already in discussing him
I compared some lines of his with some of Don Giovanni’s. The mythical Page I
let stay, I let the real one go off to the army. If I now imagined the mythical Page
having liberated himself, having got going, then I would call to mind a line of
the Page’s which suits Don Giovanni. For as Cherubino, light as a bird and
daring, jumps out of the window, this makes such a powerful impression on
Susanna that she almost swoons, and when she recovers she exclaims, ‘See how
he runs! My, won’t he have luck with the girls!’ That is quite right of Susanna,
and the reason for her swooning is not just the idea of the daring leap, but rather
that he had already succeeded with her. The Page is the future Don Giovanni,
though this is not to be understood, ridiculously, as though the Page would
become Don Giovanni just by growing older. For Don Giovanni not only has
luck with the girls, he makes them feel lucky too – and unlucky, but curiously
enough, in such a way that they would have it thus, and it was a foolish girl who
did not want to be unlucky in order just once to have been lucky with Don
Giovanni.
32
In continuing to call Don Giovanni a seducer, therefore, I am not at
all imagining him slyly drafting his plans, craftily calculating the effect of his
intrigues. His deception is due to the genius of sensuality, whose incarnation it is
as though he was. He lacks shrewd circumspection; his life is effervescent like
the wine with which he fortifies himself, his life is excited like the tones which
accompany his joyous feast, he is always triumphant. He needs no preparation,
no plan, no time, for he is always ready, the force is always in him and the desire
too, and only when he desires is he in his proper element. He is seated at the
table, he raises the goblet, happy as a god – he rises with napkin in hand, ready
to attack. If Leporello rouses him in the middle of the night, he wakes up always
certain of victory. But this force, this power words cannot express, only music
can give us an idea of it, for it is inexpressible in reflection and thought. The
cunning of an ethically specified seducer I can clearly present in words, and
music would presume in vain to perform that task. With Don Giovanni the
converse is the case. What is this force? No one can say. Even if I asked Zerlina
before she went to the ball, ‘What is this force with which he captivates you?’,
she would reply, ‘No one knows’; and I would say, ‘Well said, my child! You
speak more wisely than the wise men of India, richtig, das weiss man nicht; and
the unfortunate thing is that I can’t tell you either.’
This force in Don Giovanni, this omnipotence, this gaiety, only music can
express, and I know no other description for it than ‘exuberant good cheer’. So
when Kruse
33 has Don Giovanni say as he comes on stage at Zerlina’s wedding,
‘Cheer up, children! You are all dressed as though for your own weddings!’, he
is quite right and perhaps more than he thinks. For the gaiety is something he
brings with him, and as far as the wedding goes, it is not insignificant that they
are all dressed as though for their own weddings; for Don Giovanni is not just
Zerlina’s man, he celebrates with sport and song the weddings of all the young
girls in the parish. What wonder then that they flock round him, the happy girls!
Nor will they be disappointed, for he is enough for them all. Flattery, sighs, bold
glances, soft handclasps, secret whisperings, dangerous proximity, tempting
withdrawal – and yet these are only the lesser mysteries, the gifts before the
wedding.
34
It is a delight for Don Giovanni to look out over such a rich harvest;
he takes care of the whole parish, and yet perhaps it does not cost him as much
time as Leporello uses in the office.
These considerations bring us back to the main topic of this inquiry, that Don
Giovanni is absolutely musical. He desires sensually, seduces with the demonic
power of sensuality, he seduces all. The spoken word is no part of him, for that
would straightaway make him a reflective individual. He has no substance of
this kind but hurries on in a perpetual vanishing, just like music, of which it is
true that it is over as soon as it stops playing and only comes back into existence
when it starts again. So if I were now to raise the question of Don Giovanni’s
looks – is he handsome, young or old, about how old? – it is just a concession on
my part, and anything I say on this score can only expect admission here in the
way that a tolerated sect is given room in the State Church. Handsome, not
altogether young; if I were to suggest his age, my proposal would be thirty-three,
that being the age of a generation. The trouble with going into questions of this
kind is that one loses the whole by dwelling on the parts, as if it were through his
good looks, or whatever else might be mentioned, that Don Giovanni seduces.
One sees him then, but no longer hears him, and then he is lost. If, as it were, to
do my bit in helping the reader form a mental picture of Don Giovanni, I said,
‘Look, there he stands, see how his eyes blaze, his lips curl in a smile, so certain
is he of his victory; look at his regal glance, which demands the things that are
Caesar’s; see how gracefully he enters into the dance, how proudly he stretches
out his hand, how happy the one to whom it is offered’ – or if I said, ‘Look, there
he stands in the shadow of the forest, he leans against a tree, he accompanies
himself on a guitar, and look! there disappears a young girl among the trees,
frightened as a startled fawn, but he is in no hurry, he knows she seeks him’ – or
if I said, ‘There he rests by the shore of the lake in the pale night, so beautiful
that the moon pauses and relives its youthful love, so beautiful that the young
girls from the town would give much to dare steal up on him and use the
moment of darkness, while the moon rises up again to illumine the heavens, to
kiss him.’ If I did this, the attentive reader would say, ‘Look, now he’s spoiled
everything for himself, he has forgotten that Don Giovanni is not to be seen but
heard.’ So I do not do that but say, ‘Listen to Don Giovanni; that’s to say, if you
cannot get an idea of Don Giovanni by listening to him, you will never get one.
Hear the beginning of his life; as lightning twists out of the thunder cloud’s
murk, he bursts forth from the depth of earnest, swifter than lightning, less
constant than it yet just as measured. Hear how he plunges into life’s diversity,
how he dashes himself against its solid dam, hear these light, dancing tones of
the violin, hear the beckoning of joy, hear the exultation of desire, hear the
festive bliss of enjoyment; hear his wild flight; he hurries past even himself, ever
faster, ever more impetuously; hear the murmur of love, hear the whisper of
temptation, hear the swirl of seduction, hear the stillness of the moment – listen,
listen, listen, to Mozart’s Don Giovanni.
2. Other Adaptations of Don Juan, Considered in Relation to the Musical Interpretation
The Faust motif, as we know, has been interpreted in a wide variety of ways;
but this is not so with Don Juan. That may seem strange, especially as the latter
idea represents a far more universal phase in the development of the individual
life than does the first. However, this can easily be explained by the fact that the
Faustian motif presupposes a degree of spiritual development that makes
interpretation far more natural. There is also the fact, of which I reminded you
above, that there is no corresponding Don Juan legend, that people have been
dimly aware of the difficulty over the medium until Mozart discovered the
medium and the idea. Only since then has the idea acquired its true dignity and
again, more than ever, given content to a phase of the individual’s life, but so
satisfactorily that the need to encapsulate the experience separately in
imagination was no longer a poetic necessity.
This, once more, is indirect proof of the absolute classic value of this
Mozartian opera. The ideal in this direction having now already found its perfect
artistic expression, people could indeed be tempted by it, but not to poetic
activity. Tempting Mozart’s music has no doubt been, for where is the young
man for whom there have not been moments when he would have given half his
fortune to be a Don Juan, or perhaps all of it; when he would have given half his
lifetime to be a Don Juan for a year, or perhaps the whole of it. But that’s how it
was; those of a deeper nature who were affected by the idea found everything in
Mozart’s music, even the gentlest breeze; they found in its passionate grandeur a
full-toned expression of what stirred in their own hearts; they sensed how every
mood strained in the music’s direction, just as the brook hurries on to lose itself
in the infinity of the ocean. These natures found in the Mozartian Don Juan as
much text as commentary, and while they were thus carried along and down in
its music and enjoyed the delight of losing themselves, they also gained the
riches of wonder. The music of Mozart was in no way too constricted; quite the
contrary, their own moods were broadened, assumed a larger-than-life
dimension, as they recaptured them again in Mozart. Those of a lower nature
who have no inkling of infinity do not grasp hold of it; of course the dabblers
who took themselves to be a Don Juan because they had pinched a peasant girl’s
cheek, flung their arms round a waitress, or made a little maiden blush,
understood neither the idea nor Mozart, nor how to produce a Don Juan
themselves, other than a ridiculous monstrosity, a family idol who perhaps might
have seemed a true Don Juan, the epitome of all attractiveness, to the dim,
sentimental eyes of some cousins. Faust has never been able to find expression
in this sense, and, as noted above, never will, because the idea is far more
concrete. Though an interpretation of Faust may deserve to be called perfect, a
succeeding generation can still give birth to a new Faust; while Don Juan, due to
the abstractness of the motif, lives eternally for all ages, and the thought of
providing a Don Juan after Mozart cannot but be like wanting to write a postHomerian Iliad in an even more profound sense.
Now, even if that is so, it by no means follows that individual talents should
not have tried their hands at interpreting Don Juan differently. Everyone knows
they have, but what no one has perhaps noticed is that the representative type for
all interpretations is essentially Molière’s Don Juan.
35
though again, this is much
older than Mozart’s, and is a comedy. It is to Mozart’s Don Giovanni what a
fairy-tale in Musaeus’s interpretation is to an adaptation of Tieck’s.
36 So really I
can confine myself to a discussion of the Don Juan of Molière and in attempting
an aesthetic appraisal of it I can judge the others at the same time. […]
We have already indicated the turning-point in interpreting Don Juan: as soon
as we give him spoken lines everything changes, for the reflection which
motivates the spoken line refracts him out of the obscurity in which he is audible
only musically. For that reason Don Juan might perhaps seem best interpreted as
ballet. And people are fairly familiar with the fact that he has indeed been
interpreted in that way.
37 One has to praise this interpretation, however, for
recognizing what are after all its limitations, something which has led to its
confining itself to the final scene, where the passion of Don Juan can be made
most easily visible through the pantomimic play of muscles. The result again is
that Don Juan is represented not according to his essential but to his accidental
passion, and the playbill for such a performance always has more in it than the
piece itself; it tells us, for instance, that it is Don Juan, the seducer Don Juan,
whereas the ballet for all practical purposes only presents the pangs of despair,
whose expression, seeing this can only be pantomime, Don Juan can have in
common with many other despairing persons. What is essential in Don Juan
cannot be represented in ballet, and everyone intuitively feels how ridiculous it
would be to see Don Juan beguiling a girl with his dance steps and contrived
gesticulations. Don Juan is an inward specification and so cannot become visible
in this way or reveal himself in bodily forms and their movements, or in
sculptured harmony.
Even if we were not to give him spoken lines, we could nevertheless imagine
an interpretation of Don Juan using words as its medium. Indeed we have an
example from Byron. That Byron was in many ways just the man to present a
Don Juan is clear enough, and one may therefore be sure that the reason for the
project’s miscarrying lay not in Byron himself but far deeper. Byron has dared to
bring Don Juan into existence for us, to tell us of his childhood and youth, to
reconstruct him from a context of finite life-circumstances. The result is to make
Don Juan into a reflective personality who loses the ideality that is his in the
traditional conception. I can detail here right away what changes occur in the
idea. When Don Juan is interpreted musically I hear the whole of the infinity of
passion in him, but also its infinite power which nothing can resist; I hear the
wild craving of desire, but also that desire’s absolute triumphancy which it
would be in vain for anyone to oppose. You only need to think once of the
obstacle to realize that its function is merely to inflame the passion than put up
any real resistance; the pleasure is magnified, the victory is certain and the
obstacle only an incitement. A life agitated in this elemental way, demonically
powerful and irresistible, that is what Don Juan conveys to me. This is his
ideality, and this I can take uninterrupted pleasure in, because the music does not
represent him to me as a person or individual, but as a power. If Don Juan is
interpreted as an individual, that alone puts him in conflict with a world around
him; as an individual he feels the pressure and chains of this environment;
perhaps as a great individual he overcomes it, but one immediately feels that
here the difficulties in the obstacles have a different role. It is on them that
interest is essentially focused. But this brings Don Juan within the category of
the interesting. Were we to resort to a bombastic show of words in representing
him as absolutely victorious, we would feel immediately that this was not
satisfactory, since it does not belong essentially to an individual as such to be
victorious, and the crisis of conflict is called for.
The resistance the individual has to contend with can be partly an external
resistance lying not so much in the object as in the environing world, partly a
resistance in the object itself. Most interpretations of Don Juan have been mainly
occupied with the former, because the element in the motif that has been retained
is the need for him to be erotically victorious. On the other hand, I think that
stressing the other side opens up the only prospect of a significant contrast to the
musical Don Juan, while any interpretation lying in between is bound to contain
imperfections. So that in the musical Don Juan one would then have the
extensive seducer, in the other the intensive one. The latter Don Juan is not
presented then as possessing his object by a single stroke, he is not the
immediate seducer, he is the reflective seducer. What interests us is the
astuteness, the cunning with which he can insinuate himself into a girl’s heart,
the dominion he can acquire over it, the fascinating, systematic, progressive
seduction. It becomes a matter of indifference how many he has seduced; what
concerns us is the art, the thoroughness, the profound ingenuity with which he
seduces. In the end the very enjoyment becomes so reflective that compared with
the musical Don Juan’s enjoyment it becomes something else. The musical Don
Juan enjoys the satisfaction, the reflective Don Juan enjoys the deception, enjoys
the cunning. The immediate enjoyment is over, and a greater enjoyment is found
in reflecting upon the enjoyment. There is a hint or two of this in Molière’s
interpretation, only there is no chance of its coming into its own since all the rest
of the interpretation interferes. Desire awakens in Don Juan because he sees one
of the girls happy in her relation to the one she loves, and he begins by being
jealous. This is a point of interest that would not occupy us at all in the opera,
precisely because Don Giovanni is not a reflective individual. Once Don Juan is
interpreted as a self-aware individual, we can achieve an ideality corresponding
to the musical one only by transferring the matter to the psychological domain.
Then one attains the ideality of intensity. For that reason Byron’s Don Juan must
be considered a failure, because it expands itself epically. The immediate Don
Juan has to seduce 1,003, the self-aware one has only to seduce one, and what
occupies us is how he does it. The self-aware Don Juan’s seduction is a sleightof-hand every single little step of which has its special significance; the musical
Don Giovanni’s seduction is a flick of the wrist, the matter of a moment, quicker
done than said. I am reminded of a tableau I once saw. A pretty young fellow, a
real ladies’ man, was playing with a number of young girls who were all at that
dangerous age when they are neither grown-up nor children. Among other
things, they were amusing themselves by jumping over a ditch. He stood at the
edge and helped them jump by taking them around the waist, lifting them lightly
into the air, and then setting them down on the other side. It was a charming
sight; I enjoyed him just as much as I enjoyed the young girls. Then I thought of
Don Juan. They fling themselves into his arms, these young girls; then he grabs
them, and just as briskly sets them down on the other side of life’s ditch.
The musical Don Juan is absolutely victorious and therefore, of course, also in
complete command of all the means that can contribute to this victory. Or rather,
he is in such absolute command of the means that it is as though he had no need
to use them; that is, he does not use them as a means. Once he is a reflective
individual it appears there is something there called the means. If the poet then
grants him this, but also makes the opposition and obstacles so serious as to
make victory doubtful, then Don Juan comes within the category of the
interesting and in this regard one may think of several interpretations of Don
Juan, up to the point where we reach what we earlier called intensive seduction.
If the poet denies him the means, the interpretation falls into the category of
comedy. I have never seen a perfect interpretation that brings him into the
category of the interesting. On the other hand, of most interpretations of Don
Juan it can truly be said that they approach comedy [which] can easily be
explained by their adherence to Molière, in whose interpretation comedy lies
dormant […] Once a passion is portrayed and denied the means of its
satisfaction, either a tragic or a comic turn may be produced. You cannot
properly produce a tragic turn where the motif appears entirely unwarranted, and
that is why the comic is so likely. If I depict an addiction to gambling in some
individual and then give this individual five dollars to lose, the effect is comic.
This is not quite how it is with Molière’s Don Juan, but there is a similarity. If I
place Don Juan in financial straits, harassed by creditors, then he immediately
loses the ideality he has in the opera, and the effect is comic. The famous
comedy scene in Molière,
38 which has great value and also fits very well into the
whole, ought therefore never to be introduced into the opera, where it has a
totally distracting effect.
That the Molière interpretation aspires to the comic is shown not only by the
comedy scene just mentioned, which in isolation would prove nothing at all; the
whole plot bears its mark. Sganarelle’s first and last lines, the beginning and end
of the whole piece, provide more than sufficient evidence of this. Sganarelle
begins with a eulogy over a rare snuff, from which one learns among other
things that he cannot be all that busy in this Don Juan’s service. He ends by
complaining that he alone has been wronged. When one then considers that
Molière, too, has the statue come and fetch Don Juan, and that despite
Sganarelle’s also having witnessed this horror Molière nevertheless puts those
words into his mouth, as though Sganarelle were saying that since the statue
otherwise meddled in the exercise of justice on earth and the punishment of vice,
it ought to have been ready to pay Sganarelle the wages due to him for long and
faithful service to Don Juan, which his master had been unable to do because of
his sudden departure – when one considers this, then indeed anyone will have a
sense of the comical in Molière’s Don Juan. […] The hero of the piece, Don
Juan, is anything but a hero; he is a subject of misfortune, who has presumably
failed his finals and has now chosen another vocation. True, one learns that he is
the son of a very distinguished man, who has also tried to inspire him to virtue
and immortal enterprises by impressing upon him the great name of his
forefathers, but this is so improbable in relation to the rest of his behaviour that
one soon begins to suspect the whole thing of being a pack of lies fabricated by
Don Juan himself. His conduct is not very chivalrous; one does not see him
sword in hand clearing a path for himself through life’s difficulties; he deals out
cuffs on the ear to this one and that; yes, he even reaches the point of coming to
blows with one of the girls’ betrothed. So if Molière’s Don Juan really is a
knight, the poet is very good at having us forget the fact and does all he can to
show us a bully, an ordinary rake, who is not afraid of using his fists. Anyone
who has had occasion to observe what we call a rake knows, too, that this class
of people has a great predilection for the sea, and he will therefore find it quite
as it should be that Don Juan should set eyes on a pair of skirts and then put out
after them in a boat on Kallebostrand – a Sunday adventure, plus the fact that the
boat capsizes. Don Juan and Sganarelle are almost drowned and are finally saved
by Pedro and the tall Lucas, who were earlier betting whether it was a man or a
stone, a wager that cost Lucas ten sous, which is almost too much for Lucas and
for Don Juan. If all this then strikes one as appropriate, the impression becomes
confused for a moment when one learns that Don Juan is also the fellow who has
seduced Elvira, murdered the Commendatore, and so on, something one finds
quite illogical and must once again explain as a lie in order to restore harmony. If
Sganarelle is meant to give us an idea of the passion raging in Don Juan, his
expression is such a travesty that it is impossible not to laugh, as when
Sganarelle says to Gusman that, to get the one he wants, Don Juan would gladly
marry her dog and cat, indeed what is worse, ‘and you into the bargain’; or when
he remarks that his master has faith neither in love nor in medicine.
Now if Molière’s interpretation of Don Juan, regarded as a comic adaptation,
were correct, then I should say no more about it here, since I am concerned in
this inquiry only with the ideal interpretation and the significance of music for
that. I could then be content with calling attention to the remarkable
circumstance that only in music has Don Juan been interpreted ideally in the
ideality he has in the traditional medieval conception. The absence of an ideal
interpretation in the medium of words could then furnish indirect proof of the
correctness of my proposition. Here, however, I can do better, precisely because
Molière is not correct, and what has prevented him from being so is his having
kept something of the ideal in Don Juan that is due to the traditional conception.
It will again appear, on my pointing this out, that this could be essentially
expressed, after all, only in music, and so I return to my proper thesis.
Right at the beginning of the first act of Molière’s Don Juan, Sganarelle makes
a very long speech in which he wants to give us a conception of his master’s
boundless passion and the multiplicity of his adventures. This speech exactly
corresponds with the servant’s second aria in the opera. The speech has
absolutely no other effect than comedy. […] It tries to give us some hint of his
power, but the effect fails to materialize; only music can incorporate this factor
because it describes Don Juan’s behaviour and lets us hear the power of
seduction, at the same time as the list is unrolled for us.
In Molière, the statue arrives in the last act to fetch Don Juan. Even if the poet
has tried to motivate the statue’s appearance by giving advance warning, this
piece of stone always presents a dramatic stumbling-block. If Don Juan is
interpreted ideally as force, as passion, then heaven itself must be set in motion.
If he is not so interpreted, it is always ill-advised to use such drastic means.
Really the Commendatore need not have inconvenienced himself. […] It would
be quite in the spirit of modern comedy, which has no need of such great forces
of destruction precisely because the motivating powers themselves are not so
grandiose, to have Don Juan thrown into a debtor’s gaol. It would be quite
consistent with it to let Don Juan learn the tedious constraints of reality. In the
opera it is quite right that the Commendatore should reappear, but then his
conduct too possesses an ideal truth. The music immediately makes the
Commendatore into something more than a particular individual, his voice is
expanded to that of a spirit. So, just as Don Giovanni himself is interpreted with
aesthetic seriousness in the opera, so too is the Commendatore. In Molière he
comes in with an ethical gravity and weightiness that make him almost
ridiculous; in the opera he comes in with aesthetic lightness, metaphysical truth.
No power in the piece, no power on earth has been able to coerce Don Giovanni;
only a spirit, a ghost, can do that. If this is understood correctly it will again
throw light on the interpretation of Don Juan. A spirit, a ghost, is a reproduction;
this is the mystery in the return; but Don Giovanni can do everything, can put up
with anything, except the reproduction of life, precisely because he is sensual
life in its immediacy, the negation of which is spirit.
In Molière’s interpretation, Sganarelle becomes an inexplicable figure whose
character is extremely confused. What causes the confusion is, again, that
Molière has kept something of the traditional idea. As Don Giovanni is
altogether a force, this also shows in the relation to Leporello. Leporello feels
drawn to him, overwhelmed by him, is absorbed in him, and he becomes merely
an instrument of his master’s will. This obscure, impenetrable sympathy is
exactly what makes Leporello into a musical personality, and we find it quite in
order that he does not manage to tear himself away from Don Giovanni. With
Sganarelle it is different. In Molière, Don Juan is a particular individual, and so
it is as to an individual that Sganarelle relates to him. If Sganarelle then feels
indissolubly bound to Don Juan, it is no more than a modest aesthetic
requirement to ask how this is to be explained. It is nothing to the purpose that
Molière has him say that he cannot tear himself away from Don Juan, for neither
reader nor spectator can see any rational ground for this, and a rational ground is
just what is in question. Leporello’s inconstancy is well motivated in the opera,
because compared with Don Giovanni he himself is closer to being an individual
consciousness, and in him the Don Giovanni-life is therefore reflected
differently, though without his really being able to penetrate it. In Molière,
Sganarelle is sometimes worse, sometimes better than Don Juan, but it is
unthinkable that he should not desert him when he does not even get his wages.
If one were to imagine a unity in Sganarelle corresponding to the sympathetic
musical opacity of Leporello in the opera, there would be nothing for it but to let
it be a sottish partiality. Here again we see an example of how the musical must
be invoked for Don Juan to be interpreted in his true ideality. The fault in
Molière is not in interpreting him comically, but in not interpreting him
correctly.
Molière’s Don Juan is also a seducer, but the piece gives us only an
impoverished idea of his role. That Elvira, in Molière, is Don Juan’s spouse is
undeniably rightly conceived, particularly for its comic effect. We see at once
that what we have here is an ordinary person who uses promises of marriage to
deceive a girl. Elvira thus loses all the ideal bearing that is hers in the opera,
where she appears with no other weapon than that of her affronted womanhood,
while here one imagines her wielding a marriage certificate; and Don Juan loses
his seductive ambiguity by being both a young man and an experienced husband,
that is to say, practised in all his extramarital escapades. How he has deceived
Elvira, with what means he has enticed her out of the convent – of this a number
of Sganarelle’s lines are supposed to enlighten us; but since the seduction scene
in the play gives us no opportunity to admire Don Juan’s art, our confidence in
these bits of information is naturally weakened. Of course inasmuch as Molière’s
Don Juan is comic, this was hardly necessary. But since he would still have us
understand that his Don Juan really is the hero Don Juan, who has deluded
Elvira and killed the Commendatore, we readily see where Molière has gone
wrong. But we are then forced to consider whether this was not really because
Don Juan can never be represented as a seducer except with the help of music,
unless, as noted above, one wishes to go into the psychology of it, which it is
hard to invest with dramatic interest.
Nor, in Molière, does one hear him deluding the two young girls, Mathurine
and Charlotte. The deception takes place off-stage, and since Molière here, too,
gives us to understand that Don Juan has made them promises of marriage, again
we get but a meagre idea of his talent. To delude a young girl with a promise of
marriage is a very inferior art, and it by no means follows from the fact that
someone is low enough to do this that he is high enough to be called Don Juan.
The only scene which seems to show us Don Juan in his seducing – though
scarcely seductive – activities is the scene with Charlotte. But to tell a young
peasant girl that she is pretty, that she has sparkling eyes, to ask her to turn round
in order to observe her figure, all this betrays nothing exceptional in Don Juan,
only that he is a lewd fellow who looks over a girl as a dealer does a horse. One
can gladly concede a comic effect to the scene, and if that is all it was intended
to have I would not discuss it here. But since this, his notorious attempt, bears no
relation to the many affairs he must have had, this scene too, directly or
indirectly, contributes to showing the imperfection in the comedy. Molière seems
to have wanted to make something more of him, seems to have wanted to
preserve the ideal in him, but he lacks the medium, and therefore everything that
actually happens falls rather flat. In general, one can say that in Molière’s Don
Juan it is only historically that we get to know that he is a seducer; we do not see
it dramatically. […]
Perhaps, in conclusion, I can elucidate what has been expounded here by
considering an often-made remark, that Molière’s Don Juan is more moral than
Mozart’s. However, if properly understood, this is precisely to eulogize the
opera. In the opera there isn’t just talk of a seducer, Don Giovanni is a seducer,
and one cannot deny that in its details the music can often be seductive enough.
But that is as it should be, and this is exactly its greatness. To say, therefore, that
the opera is immoral is a piece of foolishness originating in people who do not
know how to grasp a whole but are captured by details. The definitive aspiration
in the opera is extremely moral, and the impression it produces absolutely
salutary, because everything is big, everything has genuine, unadorned pathos,
the passion of pleasure no less than of seriousness, of enjoyment no less than of
wrath.
3. The Inner Musical Structure of the Opera
Although the title of this section may be thought self-explanatory, for safety’s
sake I shall nevertheless point out that it is of course not my intention to give an
aesthetic appraisal of Don Giovanni, or a demonstration of the dramatic structure
in the text. One must always be very cautious in making such distinctions,
especially with a classic work. For, as I have already frequently stressed in the
foregoing and repeat yet again, Don Juan can only be expressed in music,
something I have myself essentially experienced through the music, so I should
guard in every way against giving the impression that the music enters from
outside. If the matter is treated in that way, then admire the music in this opera as
much as you will, you will not have grasped its absolute significance. […] It is
not my intention to examine the whole opera so much as the opera as a whole,
not dealing with its single parts separately, but incorporating these as far as
possible in my examination, so as to see them not apart from but in their
connection with the whole.
In a drama the main interest centres quite naturally on what we call the hero of
the piece; the other characters assume only a subordinate and relative
importance. However, the more the drama is penetrated with the discriminatory
power of its own inner reflexivity, the more the minor characters, too, assume a
relative absoluteness, if I may so put it. This is by no means a fault, on the
contrary it is an advantage, just as the view of the world that can take in only
single outstanding individuals and their meaning for its development, but not the
common man, may in some sense be a higher way of looking at it, but is lower
than one that includes what is less in its equally great validity. The dramatist will
only succeed in this to the extent that there is no incommensurable remainder,
nothing of the mood from which the drama proceeds, that is to say, nothing of
the mood qua mood, but everything is converted into the sacred coin of the
drama: action and situation. To the extent that the dramatist succeeds in this, the
general impression his work produces will be correspondingly less a mood than
a thought, an idea. The more the total impression of a drama is a mood, the more
certain one can be that the poet’s own first intimation of it has been in the mood,
and he has allowed it progressively to come into being from that and has not
seized it in the form of an idea and let this unfold itself dramatically. Dramas of
the latter kind suffer from an abnormal preponderance of lyricism. This is a fault
in a drama, but by no means in an opera. What preserves the unity in the opera is
the basic tone that carries the whole production.
What has been said here about the total dramatic effect applies in turn to the
drama’s individual parts. Were I to characterize the effect of drama in a single
phrase, inasmuch as it differs from that produced by any other literary form, I
would say that drama achieves its effect in contemporaneity. In drama I see
mutually unrelated factors brought together in the situation, the unity of action.
The more then the discrete factors are separated, the more profoundly the
dramatic situation is interpenetrated with reflection, the less the dramatic unity
will be a mood and the more a definite thought. But just as the totality of the
opera cannot be brought fully to consciousness as in drama proper, so too with
the musical situation, which though indeed dramatic has nevertheless its unity in
the mood. The musical situation has contemporaneity just like every dramatic
situation, but the effect of the forces is a simultaneous sound, a concord, a
harmony, and the impression made by the musical situation is the unity achieved
by hearing together what sounds together. The more the drama is interpenetrated
with reflection, the more the mood is transmuted into action. The less action, the
more the lyrical element dominates. In opera this is quite as it should be; opera is
less concerned with character delineation and action as its immanent goal; it is
not reflective enough for that. On the other hand, in opera passion, unreflective
and substantial, finds its expression. The musical situation lies in a unity of
mood in the distinct voices. It is exactly the characteristic of music to be able to
preserve the plurality of voices in the unity of mood.
39
[…]
Dramatic interest calls for a rapid forward movement, an excited rhythm, what
one might call the immanently increasing tempo of the fall. The more the drama
is interpenetrated with reflection, the more uninterruptedly it hurries along. If, on
the other hand, there is a bias in favour of the lyrical or the epic element, this
expresses itself in a kind of numbness which allows the situation to go to sleep,
makes the dramatic procedure and progress slow and laborious. No such haste is
inherent in opera; a certain lingering is characteristic, a certain self-expansion in
time and space. The action lacks the precipitancy of the fall, or its direction, but
moves more horizontally. The mood is not sublimated in character and action.
Consequently, the action in an opera can only be immediate action.
Applying the above to Don Giovanni gives us an opportunity to see the latter
in its true classic validity. Don Giovanni is the hero in the opera, the main
interest centres on him. But that’s not all: he bestows interest on all the other
figures. This is not to be understood, however, in a merely external sense; the
very secret of this opera is that its hero is also the force animating the other
characters. Don Giovanni’s own life is the principle of life in them. His passion
sets in motion the passions of the others; it resonates everywhere, it resonates in
and sustains the Commendatore’s earnest, Elvira’s anger, Anna’s hate, Ottavio’s
self-importance, Zerlina’s anxiety, Masetto’s indignation and Leporello’s
confusion. As the eponymous hero, as a hero in general, he gives the piece its
name. But he is more; he is, if I may so put it, the common denominator.
Compared with his, the existences of all the others are merely derivative. If we
require of an opera that its unity be a tonality of mood, we see readily that no
more perfect project can be conceived for an opera than Don Giovanni. For, in
relation to the forces in the opera, this tonality might have been a third force
sustaining these. I could mention The White Lady as a case in point,
40 but, in
relation to opera, a unity of that kind brings in a further lyrical aspect. In Don
Giovanni the tonality is nothing other than the primitive power of the opera
itself; this is Don Giovanni, but again, just because he is not character but
essentially life, he is absolutely musical. The other figures in the opera are not
characters either but essentially passions posited through Don Giovanni and are,
to that extent again, musical. For as Don Giovanni entwines them all, so do they
twine themselves round Don Giovanni; they are the outward consequences
constantly posited by his life. It is this absolute centrality of the musical life of
Don Giovanni which makes this opera exert a power of illusion as no other,
makes its musical life transport one into the life of the play. Because of the
omnipresence of the musical in this opera, one may enjoy any snatch of it and be
instantly transported. One may enter in the middle of the action and instantly be
at its centre, because this centre, which is Don Giovanni’s life, is everywhere.
Well-attested experience tells us that it is not pleasant to strain two senses at
once, and it is often distracting to have to make much use of the eyes when the
ears are already occupied. We have a tendency, therefore, to close our eyes when
listening to music. This is true of all music to some extent, of Don Giovanni in a
higher sense. As soon as the eyes are engaged the impression gets confused, for
the dramatic unity afforded to the eye is entirely subordinate and defective
compared with the musical unity which is heard simultaneously. My own
experience has convinced me of this. I have sat close up, I have sat further and
further away, I have resorted to an out-of-the-way corner of the theatre where I
could hide myself totally in this music. The better I understood it or believed I
understood it, the further I moved away from it, not from coolness but from love,
for it wants to be understood at a distance. For my own life there has been
something strangely puzzling about this. There have been times when I would
have given anything for a ticket; now I needn’t spend even a penny for one. I
stand outside in the corridor; I lean up against the partition separating me from
the auditorium and then the impression is most powerful; it is a world by itself,
apart from me, I can see nothing, but am near enough to hear and yet so
infinitely far away.
Since the main figures in the opera do not need to be so interpenetrated with
reflection that, as characters, they are transparent, it also follows, as was stressed
in the foregoing, that the situation cannot be completely developed or full-blown
but must to some extent be sustained by a mood. The same applies to the action
in an opera. What is called an action in a stricter sense, a deed undertaken in the
consciousness of a purpose, cannot find expression in music, but only what one
might call immediate action. Now both of these are true of Don Giovanni. The
action is immediate action; here I must refer to the foregoing where I explained
in what sense Don Giovanni is a seducer. Because the action is immediate
action, it is also quite proper that irony should be so prevalent in this piece, for
irony is and remains the taskmaster of the immediate life. Thus, to cite just one
example, the return of the Commendatore is a monstrous irony; for Don
Giovanni can overcome every obstacle but we all know you cannot kill a ghost.
The situation is sustained throughout by the mood. I must remind you in this
connection of Don Giovanni’s significance for the piece as a whole, and of the
relative existence of the other figures in relation to him. I will indicate what I
mean by looking at a single situation more closely.
For this purpose, I choose Elvira’s first aria. The orchestra performs the
prelude, Elvira enters. The passion raging in her breast must have air, and her
song helps her find it. This, however, would be far too lyrical really to form a
situation; her aria would be like a monologue in a play. The difference would
only be that the monologue in effect renders the universal individually, the aria
the individual universally. […] In the background we see Don Giovanni and
Leporello in tense expectation of the approach of the lady they have already seen
in the window. Now if this was a play, the situation would not consist in Elvira’s
standing in the foreground with Don Juan in the background, it would consist in
the unexpected encounter. Interest would hinge upon how Don Giovanni was
going to get out of it. The encounter has its importance in the opera too, but a
very subordinate one. The encounter is there to be seen, the musical situation to
be heard. The unity in the situation is then the blending of voices in which Elvira
and Don Giovanni are heard together. It is therefore also perfectly proper for
Don Giovanni to stay as far in the background as possible; for he should not be
seen, not only by Elvira but even by the audience. Elvira’s aria begins. Her
passion I know no way of describing other than as love’s hatred, a mingled, but
full-bodied, resonant passion. Her inmost being is stirred by turbulent emotions,
she has found air, for a moment she grows faint as all passionate outbreaks
enervate; there follows a pause in the music. But the turbulence in her inmost
being is sufficient to show that her passion has not yet found expression enough,
the diaphragm of wrath must vibrate still more intensely. But what can call forth
this agitation, what incitement? There can be but one thing – Don Giovanni’s
mockery. Mozart has therefore made use of this pause in the music – would that
I were a Greek, for then I would say, quite divinely – to fling in Don Giovanni’s
jeering laughter. Now passion blazes stronger, rages even more violently within
her and bursts forth in sound. Once again it repeats itself; then her inmost soul
trembles, and wrath and pain pour forth like a stream of lava in the celebrated
run with which the aria ends.
Here then we see what I mean when I say that Don Giovanni resonates in
Elvira, that it is no mere phrase-making on my part. The spectator is not meant
to see Don Giovanni, is not meant to see him together with Elvira, in the unity of
the situation; he is meant to hear him inside Elvira, coming out of Elvira, for
although it is Don Giovanni singing, the way he sings is such that the more
developed the spectator’s ear the more it sounds as though it was coming from
Elvira herself. As love fashions its object, so too does indignation. She is
obsessed with Don Giovanni. That pause and Don Giovanni’s voice make the
situation dramatic, but what makes it musical is the unity in Elvira’s passion, in
which Don Giovanni resonates while it is nevertheless through him that her
passion is posited. Musically conceived, the situation is matchless. But if Don
Giovanni is a character and Elvira equally so, then it is a failure and a mistake to
let Elvira unburden herself in the foreground while Don Giovanni jeers in the
background, for that requires me to hear them together yet without my being
given the means to do so, quite apart from their both being characters who could
not possibly harmonize in that way. If they are characters, then it is the encounter
which forms the situation.
It was remarked above that although opera does not call for the same dramatic
urgency, the mounting acceleration of events, as drama, the situation can very
well expand just a little. Yet this must not degenerate into perpetual stoppage. As
an instance of the happy medium I can single out the situation just discussed,
though not as if that were the only one in Don Giovanni, or the most perfect –
quite the contrary, they are all like this and all perfect – but because the reader
will remember this one best. And yet here I am coming to a touchy point; for I
admit that there are two arias that must go, which, however perfect they may be
in themselves, have nevertheless an obstructive, retarding effect. I would gladly
make a secret of this but there is no help for it now, the truth must out. If these
are removed, all the rest is just as perfect. One of them is Ottavio’s, the other
Anna’s; they are both more like concert pieces than dramatic music, just as
Ottavio and Anna are far too insignificant figures to justify holding up the
action. When they are removed the musical-dramatic pace of the rest of the
opera is perfect, perfect as no other.
It would be well worth the trouble of going through each individual situation
individually, not to accompany it with an exclamation mark but to show its
significance, its validity as a musical situation. That, however, is beyond the
scope of the present little inquiry. What is especially important here is to
highlight the Cenerality of Don Giovanni within the opera as a whole.
Something similar recurs with regard to the individual situations.
I shall throw a little more light on this centrality of Don Giovanni in the opera
by considering the other figures in the work in their relation to him. As in a solar
system, the dark bodies receiving their light from a sun in the centre are always
only half illuminated, on the side facing the sun, so too with the figures in this
piece. Only that aspect of life, that side, which is turned towards Don Giovanni
is illuminated; otherwise these figures are dim and obscure. This must not be
understood in the restricted sense as though each of them were one or another
abstract passion – as though Anna, for example, were hate, Zerlina frivolity.
Here, least of all, is the place for examples of such poor taste. The passion in the
individual is concrete, though concrete in itself, not concrete in the figure; or, to
express myself more distinctly, everything else in the figure is swallowed up by
that passion. That is absolutely right, because here we are dealing with an opera.
This obscurity, this partly sympathetic, partly antipathetic mysterious
communication with Don Giovanni makes all of them musical, and has the effect
of making the whole opera consonate in Don Giovanni. The only figure in the
piece who seems an exception is, naturally, the Commendatore; but that too is
why it is so wisely planned as to have him He to some extent outside the piece,
or circumscribe it; the more the Commendatore was brought to the fore, the
more the opera would cease to be absolutely musical. So he is always kept in the
background and as indistinct as possible. The Commendatore is the powerful
antecedent and the fearless consequent between which lives Don Giovanni’s
middle premiss, but the rich content of this middle premiss is the substance of
the opera. The Commendatore appears only twice. The first time it is night, it is
at the back of the stage, we cannot see him but we hear him fall to Don
Giovanni’s sword. His gravity, made all the more strongly apparent by Don
Giovanni’s parodying mockery, is something Mozart has already splendidly
expressed in the music; already his seriousness is too profound to be that of a
human being; he is spirit even before he dies. The second time it is as spirit that
he appears, and the thundering of heaven resounds in his earnest, solemn voice,
but as he himself is transfigured, so his voice is transformed into something
more than human; he speaks no more, he judges.
Next to Don Giovanni the most important character in the piece is clearly
Leporello. His relation to his master is explicable precisely through the music;
without music it is inexplicable. If Don Giovanni were a reflective individual,
Leporello would become almost a greater scoundrel than him; then it would be
inexplicable how Don Giovanni was able to exercise so much power over him,
the only motivation left being his ability to pay him better than anyone else – a
motivation that even Molière seems not to resort to, since he has his Don Juan
financially embarrassed. If, on the other hand, we continue to identify Don
Giovanni as the life of immediacy, we easily grasp how he can exercise a
decisive influence upon Leporello, that the latter assimilates him so completely
that he almost becomes one of Don Giovanni’s functioning parts. In a sense
Leporello comes nearer to being consciously personal than Don Giovanni, yet to
be that he would have to be clear about his relation to the latter; but that he
cannot manage, he is unable to break the spell. Here too it is the case that
whenever Leporello is given spoken lines he has to be transparent to us. Even in
Leporello’s relation to Don Giovanni there is something erotic, a power with
which he is captivated against his will; but in this ambiguity he is musical and
Don Giovanni constantly resonates through him. I shall offer an example later to
show that this is no mere phrase-making on my part.
With the exception of the Commendatore, everyone is in some kind of erotic
relationship to Don Giovanni. Over the Commendatore he cannot exercise any
power, for he is consciousness. The others are in his power: Elvira loves him,
which puts her in his power; Anna hates him, which puts her in his power;
Zerlina fears him, which puts her in his power; Ottavio and Masetto go along
with him for the sake of brotherhood-in-law, for the ties of blood are tender.
If I look back now for a moment upon what has been expounded, the reader
will perhaps see how, here again, the matter has been explicated from many
sides: what relation the Don Juan idea bears to the musical, how this relation is
constitutive of the whole opera, how this is repeated in the individual parts. I
could gladly stop at this point, but for the sake of even greater completeness I
shall shed light on the matter by examining some individual pieces. The choice
will not be arbitrary. I take the overture, which really lays down for us, in a
tightly concentrated form, the tonality of the opera’s mood. Next I take the most
epic and the most lyrical moments in the work, in order to show how the
perfection of the opera is preserved, the musical drama maintained, even at its
extremes, and how Don Giovanni sustains the opera musically.
This is not the place for a general account of the part played by the overture in
opera. All we can single out here is the circumstance that the fact that an opera
needs an overture is enough to show the preponderance of the lyrical, and that
the effect thus aimed at is the evocation of a mood, which is something drama
cannot take upon itself, since there everything must be transparent. It is
appropriate, therefore, that the overture be composed last, so that the artist
himself can be properly permeated with the music. So the overture generally
affords an opportunity to gain a deep insight into the composer’s soul and its
relation to his music. If he hasn’t succeeded in grasping its centre, if he has no
deeper rapport with the basic mood in the opera, this will betray itself
unmistakably in the overture; it will then be a random compilation of the salient
points based on the association of ideas, but not a totality containing, as it really
should, the most profound illumination of the music’s content. An overture of
that kind is therefore as a rule also entirely arbitrary; it can be as long or as short
as it likes, and the collative element, the element of continuity, since it is only an
association of ideas, can be made to spin out as long as may be. To inferior
composers the overture is therefore often a dangerous temptation, for they are
led to plagiarize themselves, pick from their own pockets, something that causes
much confusion. While clearly the content of the overture should not be the
same as the opera’s, neither, of course, should it be anything absolutely different.
Its content should be the same but in some other way. It should contain what is
central to the piece so that this can seize the listener with all its might.
In this respect, the ever-admired overture to Don Giovanni is and will remain a
perfect masterpiece, so that if no other proof were afforded of this opera’s classic
status, it would suffice to single out this fact alone, namely the inconceivability
of the one who holds the centre not also holding the periphery. This overture is
no mere fabric of themes, it is not a labyrinthine hotchpotch of associations; it is
concise, resolute, powerfully structured; and above all it is impregnated with the
essence of the whole opera. It is powerful as the thought of a god, stirring as the
life of a world, trembling in its earnest, quivering in its passion, crushing in its
terrible anger, inspiring in its zestful joy; it is sepulchral in its judgement,
strident in its lust; it is unhurriedly solemn in its imposing dignity; it is stirring,
shimmering, dancing in its joy. And it has not achieved this by sucking the blood
of the opera; quite the contrary, it is prophetic in its relation to the latter. In the
overture, the entire compass of the music unfolds; it is as though, with a few
mighty wing-beats, it hovered over itself, hovered over the place where it is to
alight. It is a contest, but a contest in the higher regions of the air. To someone
hearing the overture after making closer acquaintance with the opera, it might
perhaps seem as if he had found his way into the hidden workshop where the
forces he has come to know in the opera display their primal energy, where they
vie with one another with all their might. Yet the struggle is too unequal, one
power is already the victor before the battle, it flees and gets out of the way, but
this flight is precisely its passion, its burning unrest in its brief moment of
delight, the quickening pulse in its passionate heat. It thereby sets the other
power in motion and sweeps it along with it. This latter, which seemed at first so
unshakeably firm as to be almost immoveable, must now be off, and soon the
movement becomes so fast that it seems like a real contest. To express more of
this is an impossible task; all one can do here is listen to the music, for the
contest is not one of words but a raging of the elements. Except that I must draw
attention to what was made clear earlier, that the opera’s focus is Don Giovanni,
not Don Giovanni and the Commendatore. This is already evident in the
overture. Mozart seems to have carefully constructed it in such a way that the
deep voice which resonates at the beginning grows gradually weaker and
weaker, almost loses, as it were, its majestic bearing, has to hurry to be able to
keep up with the demonic haste which eludes it yet almost gains the power to
degrade it by dragging it, in the brevity of an instant, into a race for a wager.
With this, the transition to the opera itself gradually takes form. Consequently,
one must conceive the finale in close relation to the first part of the overture. In
the finale the gravity has once more come to itself, while in the course of the
overture it is as though it were outside itself. There is no question now of
running a race with passion; earnest has returned and has thus cut off every
avenue to a new competition.
So, while in one sense independent, the overture is to be regarded in another
sense as preliminary to the opera. I have tried in the foregoing to remind the
reader of this by refreshing his memory of the progressive diminutions in which
the one power approaches the beginning of the opera. Similarly when one
observes the other power; it grows progressively larger. It starts in the overture,
it grows and increases. What is particularly admirable is the way in which this,
its beginning, is expressed. We hear it intimated so faintly, so mysteriously; we
hear it but it is gone so quickly, so what we get is exactly the impression of
having heard something we haven’t heard. It takes an attentive, an erotic ear to
catch the first hint given in the overture of the light play of this desire, which is
later expressed so richly in all its extravagant abundance. I cannot say exactly to
the dot where this place is because I am not expert in music, but then I am
writing only for those in love, and they will surely understand me, some of them
better than I understand myself. Still, I am content with my appointed lot, with
this enigmatic infatuation, and although I usually thank the gods that I was born
a man and not a woman, Mozart’s music has taught me that it is beautiful and
restorative and rich to love like a woman.
I am no friend of metaphors; modern literature has given me a great aversion
to them; it has come almost to the point where, every time I come upon a
metaphor, I am seized by an involuntary fear that its true purpose is to conceal an
obscurity in the thought. I shall therefore not venture upon an indiscreet or
fruitless attempt to translate the overture’s energetic and terse brevity into
longwinded and platitudinous figures of speech; I single out just one point in the
overture, and will employ a metaphor to call the reader’s attention to it, that
being the only means I have for putting myself in touch with him. This point is
naturally none other than Don Giovanni’s first outburst, the premonition of him,
of the power with which he later emerges. The overture begins with distinct,
deep, serious, uniform tones; then for the first time, infinitely far away, we hear a
hint which nevertheless, as though it had come too early, is instantly recalled,
until later, again and again, bolder and bolder, louder and louder, one hears that
voice which first slyly and coyly, and yet as though anxiously, gained access but
could not force its way through. Thus sometimes in nature one sees the horizon
heavy and lowering. Too heavy to support itself, it rests upon the earth and hides
everything in its dark night; distinct hollow sounds are heard, yet not in
movement but like a deep rumbling within itself – then one sees at the furthest
bounds of the heavens, far on the horizon, a flash; swiftly it runs along the earth
and is gone in the same instant. But soon it returns, it grows stronger; for a
moment it lights up the whole heaven with its flame, the next instant the horizon
seems darker than ever; but swifter, even more fiery it blazes up; it is as if the
darkness itself had lost its calm and was getting into motion. As the eye suspects
in this first flash a conflagration, so the ear in that dying strain of the violin
stroke has a presentiment of all the passion. There is an apprehension in that
flash, it is as if in the deep darkness it were born in dread – such is Don
Giovanni’s life. There is a dread in him, but this dread is his energy. It is not a
subjectively reflected dread, it is a substantial dread. In the overture we do not
have – what we commonly say without realizing what we say – despair. Don
Giovanni’s life is not despair; it is the full might of sensuality, which is born in
dread, and Don Giovanni is himself this dread, but this dread is precisely the
demonic joy of life. After Mozart has brought him thus into existence, Don
Giovanni’s life evolves for us in the dancing tones of the violin in which he
lightly, casually, hastens forward over the abyss. As when one skims a stone over
the surface of the water, it skips lightly for a time, but as soon as it stops
skipping, instantly sinks down into the depths, that is how Don Giovanni dances
over the abyss, jubilant in his brief respite.
But if, as indicated above, the overture can be considered a preliminary to the
opera, if in the overture one climbs down from these higher regions, the question
is where best in the opera to alight, or how to get the opera to start. Here Mozart
has seen the only right way: to begin with Leporello. It might seem that there
was no great merit in this, inasmuch as practically all adaptations of the Don
Juan story begin with a monologue by Sganarelle. However, there is a big
difference, and here again one has an opportunity to admire Mozart’s mastery.
He has placed the first servant-aria in immediate conjunction with the overture.
This is a rare practice; here it is entirely appropriate, and it casts a new light on
the overture’s construction. The overture is trying to set itself down, to find a
foothold in the action on the stage. The Commendatore and Don Giovanni have
already been heard in the overture; next to them Leporello is the most important
figure. He, however, cannot be raised up into that battle in the airy regions, and
yet he is more closely involved than any other. So the action begins with him, in
such a way that he is linked immediately with the overture. It is quite correct,
then, to count Leporello’s first aria as belonging to the overture. This aria
corresponds to the not-unnoted Sganarelle monologue in Molière. We shall
examine this situation a little more closely. Sganarelle’s monologue is far from
unwitty. […] On the other hand, the situation is defective. […] I say this not to
find fault with Molière but to show Mozart’s merit. A monologue is always more
or less of an interruption in the drama, and when, for effect, the writer tries to do
this through the humour in the monologue itself, instead of through the character,
then he has irrevocably condemned himself and abandoned the dramatic interest.
In the opera it is otherwise. Here the situation is absolutely musical. I have
previously drawn attention to the difference between a dramatic and a dramaticmusical situation. In drama no idle talk is tolerated, what are needed are action
and situation. In opera the situation contains a breathing space. But then what
makes it a musical situation? It has been stressed earlier that Leporello is a
musical figure, and yet it is not he who sustains the situation. If it were, his aria
would be analogous to Sganarelle’s monologue, even though that would show
equally that a quasi-situation of this kind works better in opera than in drama.
What makes the situation musical is Don Giovanni, who is in the house. The
crux of the situation lies not in Leporello who draws near us, but in Don
Giovanni whom we do not see – but whom we hear. Now one might well object
that we do not in fact hear Don Giovanni. To this I would reply: we do indeed
hear him, for he resounds in Leporello. To this end I shall draw attention to the
transitions (voi star dentro colla bella),
41 where Leporello is obviously
reproducing Don Giovanni. But even if this were not so, the set-up of the
situation is such that we get Don Giovanni anyway, forgetting Leporello who is
outside the house because of Don Giovanni who is inside it. Altogether, Mozart
with true genius has let Leporello reproduce Don Giovanni, thus achieving two
things: the musical effect that wherever Leporello is alone we hear Don
Giovanni; and the parodying effect that when Don Giovanni is there too, we hear
Leporello rehearse him and thereby unconsciously parody him. As an example I
would mention the close of the ball.
If anyone asks what is the most epic moment in the opera, the answer is
unquestionably Leporello’s second aria, the list. We have already stressed earlier,
by comparing this aria with the corresponding monologue in Molière, the
absolute importance of the music, and how, by letting us hear Don Giovanni,
letting us hear the variations in him, the music produces an effect of which the
spoken word or the dialogue is incapable. Here it is important to emphasize both
the situation and its musical aspect. If we now look at the stage, the scenic
ensemble consists of Leporello, Elvira and the faithful servant. The faithless
lover, on the other hand, is not there, for, as Leporello fittingly puts it, ‘he is off’.
This is a virtuosity possessed by Don Giovanni, he is there and then – he is off,
and he leaves the scene as conveniently (that is, for himself) as a Jeronimus
arrives upon it.
42 Now, since it is obvious he is not there, it may seem strange
that I mention him and bring him in a sense into the situation. But, on second
thoughts, we may perhaps see that this is just as it should be, and see in it an
example of how literally we must take Don Giovanni’s omnipresence in the
opera. For one could hardly give a more striking indication of this than by
drawing attention to the fact that he is there even when he is away. But let him
be off now, all the same, so that we can see later in what sense he is present. We
look instead at the three figures on the stage. Elvira’s presence naturally
contributes to forming a situation, for it would not do to have Leporello unroll
the list just to kill time. But the position she is in also contributes to making the
situation a painful one. The mockery occasionally made of Elvira’s love is
undeniably close on cruel. Thus in the second act where, at the decisive moment,
when Ottavio has finally got the courage in his heart and the sword from its
scabbard to slay Don Giovanni, she throws herself between them and discovers
that it is not Don Giovanni but Leporello, a difference Mozart has indicated so
strikingly with a kind of whimpering bleat. Thus in the situation we are
examining there is something painful too, that she should be present to learn that
in Spain the number stands at 1,003; what is more, in the German version she is
told indeed that she is one of them. This is a German improvement as foolishly
indecent as the German translation itself is no less foolishly, ridiculously decent
and a total failure. It is to Elvira that Leporello gives an epic survey of his
master’s life, and one cannot deny that it is entirely proper that Leporello should
recite it and Elvira listen, for they are both exceedingly interested. Therefore, as
we constantly ‘hear’ Don Giovanni throughout the entire aria, so too in places
we ‘hear’ Elvira, who is now visible on the stage as an exemplary witness, not
because of some accidental merit on her part, but because, since the method
remains essentially the same, one example does for all.
If Leporello were a character or person permeated by reflection, it would be
hard to imagine such a monologue, but it is just because he is a musical figure,
who is submerged in Don Giovanni, that this aria has so much meaning. It is a
reproduction of Don Giovanni’s whole life. Leporello is the epic narrator.
Though such a one should indeed not be cold or indifferent to what he tells, he
ought to be able nevertheless to maintain an objective attitude towards it. This is
not the case with Leporello. He is totally diverted by the life he describes, he
forgets himself in Don Giovanni. So here I have another example of what it
means to say that Don Giovanni resonates everywhere. The situation therefore
consists not in Leporello and Elvira’s preoccupation with Don Giovanni, but in
the mood sustaining the whole, in Don Giovanni’s invisible, spiritual presence.
To give a more detailed account of how this aria develops, of how it begins
peacefully, with little agitation, but becomes more and more inflamed as Don
Giovanni’s life resounds increasingly within it; of how Leporello is more and
more distracted by it, wafted away in and rocked by these erotic breezes; of the
nuances it contains as the differentiations of womanhood that come within Don
Giovanni’s scope become audible in it – for here is not the place.
If anyone asks what is the most lyrical moment in the opera, the answer might
be more doubtful; while on the other hand it can hardly be open to doubt that
Don Giovanni must be conceded the most lyrical moment, and that it would be a
breach of dramatic ranking were it granted to a minor character to engage our
attention in this way. Mozart, too, has realized this. The choice is thus
considerably restricted, and on closer inspection the only possibilities are either
the banquet in the first part of the grand finale or the familiar champagne aria.
As far as the banquet scene is concerned, this may indeed be regarded as a
lyrical moment; the feast’s intoxicating cordials, the foaming wine, the festive
strains of distant music, everything unites to intensify Don Giovanni’s mood, as
his own festive gaiety throws a heightened glow over all the enjoyment, an
enjoyment so powerful in its effect that even Leporello is transfigured in this rich
moment which is the last smile of gladness, the last farewell to pleasure. On the
other hand, it is more of a situation than a sheerly lyrical moment. This, of
course, is not because there is eating and drinking on stage, for that in itself is
very inadequate in terms of a situation. The situation consists in Don Giovanni’s
being forced out to life’s furthest point. Pursued by the whole world, this
victorious Don Giovanni now has nowhere to stay except a small secluded room.
It is at the extreme tip of life’s see-saw that, once again, for lack of lusty
companionship, he excites every lust of life in his own breast. If Don Giovanni
were a drama, then this inner unrest would have to be made as brief as possible.
In the opera, on the other hand, it is proper that it is maintained, glorified by
every possible exuberance, which only sounds the wilder because, for the
spectators, it reverberates in the abyss over which Don Giovanni is hovering.
It is otherwise with the champagne aria. One looks here in vain, I believe, for a
dramatic situation. But it has all the more significance as a lyrical effusion. Don
Giovanni is wearied of the many intersecting intrigues; on the other hand he is
by no means spent, his soul is still as vigorous as ever, he has no need of
convivial society, to see and hear the foaming of the wine or to fortify himself
with it; the inner vitality bursts forth in him stronger and richer than ever. Mozart
constantly interprets him ideally, as life, as power, but ideally in opposition to a
reality; here he is as though ideally intoxicated in himself. If all the girls in the
world surrounded him at this moment he would be no danger to them, for it is as
though he is too strong to want to turn their heads, even reality’s most variegated
enjoyment is too little for him compared with what he enjoys in himself. Here is
the clear indication of what it means to say that the essence of Don Giovanni is
music. He dissolves before us into music, he dilates into a world of tones. This
has been called the champagne aria, and that is undeniably very apt. But what is
especially to be noted is that it stands in no accidental relation to Don Giovanni.
This is his life, foaming like champagne. And just as the bubbles in this wine,
while it seethes in inner heat, sonorous in its own melody, rise and continue to
rise, so the desire for enjoyment resounds in the elemental boiling that is his life.
What gives this aria dramatic significance is not the situation, but the fact that
here the keynote of the opera sounds and resounds in itself.
PLATITUDINOUS POSTLUDE
Assuming what has been elaborated here is correct, I return once again to my
favourite theme, that among all classic works Mozart’s Don Ciovanni stands
highest. I shall rejoice once again over Mozart’s good luck, a fortune which is
truly enviable, both in itself and because it brings fortune to all those who only
moderately grasp his good fortune. For myself, at least, I feel indescribably
fortunate in having even remotely understood Mozart, and in having gained
some intimations of his good fortune. How much more so, then, those who have
perfectly understood him, how much more fortunate must they feel with that
fortunate man.
3 ANCIENT TRAGEDY’S REFLECTION
IN THE MODERN
An Essay in the Fragmentary Endeavour
Read before
Symparanekromenoi
1
An Essay in the Fragmentary Endeavour
IF someone said the tragic will always be the tragic, I wouldn’t object too
much; every historical development takes place within the embrace of its
concept. At least assuming that what he says makes sense, and that the twicerepeated ‘tragic’ isn’t just a meaningless bracket surrounding a contentless
nothing, the meaning must be that the content of the concept didn’t turn the
concept off its throne but enriched it. But then surely no observer has failed to
notice something – what the reading and theatre-going public indeed already
thinks it has legal possession of as a dividend for the labours of the culture
experts – namely that there is an essential difference between ancient and
modern tragedy. If one were to go on and absolutize this difference, and exploit
it first stealthily and then perhaps forcibly to separate the ancient from the
modem conception of the tragic, this would be no less absurd than in the former
case, for one would be forgetting that the foothold one needs is the tragic itself,
and that far from their being separable, this was precisely what bound the ancient
and the modern conceptions together. And it must be a warning against any such
partisan attempt to separate them that aestheticians still constantly invoke
Aristotle’s apparatus of conditions and criteria as exhaustive of the concept. All
the more necessary this warning in that it must seize people with a certain
sadness that, however much the world has changed, the concept of the tragic
nevertheless remains essentially unchanged, just as weeping still comes no less
naturally to man.
Reassuring as this may seem to one who wishes no divorce, let alone a
separation, the same difficulty just circumvented reappears in another and even
more dangerous form. No one at all familiar with modern aesthetics, and who
therefore recognizes how closely Aristotle’s principles are adhered to and still
constantly apply in modern aesthetics,
2 will deny that we still keep on going
back to Aristotelian aesthetics, not just from dutiful observance or force of habit.
But when we look more nearly at these principles the difficulties are
immediately evident. The criteria are quite general in kind, and one could easily
agree entirely with Aristotle and yet in another sense disagree. So as not to
anticipate the discussion that follows by mentioning right at the start the subject
that will provide its content, I shall illustrate what I mean by making the
corresponding point about comedy. If an aesthetician of the past had said that
what comedy presupposes is character and situation, and that what it gives rise to
is laughter, this is something we can appeal to over and over again; but as soon
as one reflects on how different the things can be that make people laugh, one is
quickly apprised of the criterion’s colossal scope. Anyone who has ever
observed others’ or his own laughter, anyone who in the course of such
observation has kept his eye less on accidental differences than on the general
features, whoever has noted with psychological interest how different the things
are that each generation finds laughable, will be readily convinced that this
unchanging criterion of comedy – that it gives rise to laughter – embraces a high
degree of changeableness respecting how the world consciousness conceives the
laughable, yet without the differences being so far-reaching that the bodily
expression of laughter might be weeping. The same, then, is true of the tragic.
The gist of this little inquiry will, in the main, be not so much the relation
between the ancient and the modern conception of the tragic, as an attempt to
show how the special characteristic of ancient tragedy can be discerned in the
modern, so that the true tragedy in the latter may come to light. Yet however
hard I try to ensure that it does come to light, I shall refrain from prophecies
about this being what the age demands. Nothing, then, will result from its
corning to light; all the more so that the tendency of the whole age is rather
towards comedy. Human existence is considerably undermined by doubt on the
part of its subjects and isolation is consistently gaining the upper hand, the best
confirmation of which is to take note of all the various social exertions. By
aiming to oppose the tendency to isolation, such exertions serve only to confirm
it, as far as they do so by adopting such misguided means. To be isolated is
always to assert oneself numerically; when you assert yourself as one, that is
isolation. I’m sure all friends of association will concur with me in this, even if
they are incapable of seeing that just the same isolation obtains when hundreds
want to assert themselves as nothing but hundreds. To a number itself the
number is always a matter of indifference, whether it is one or a thousand or the
whole world’s population specified merely as a number. This spirit of association
is therefore in principle just as revolutionary as the spirit it would counteract.
When David wanted to savour properly his power and glory, he had his people
counted.
3
In our age you might say, on the contrary, that to feel their importance
in the face of a greater power, people count themselves. But all these
associations bear the stamp of contingency and are usually formed for some
accidental purpose or other, naturally that of the association itself.
The numerous associations thus prove the age’s dissolution, and themselves
help to hasten it. They are the infusoria in the organism of the state which
indicate that it is indeed in dissolution. When did political clubs begin to be
general in Greece if not just when the state was on the point of dissolution? And
hasn’t our own age a remarkable similarity to the one which not even
Aristophanes could make more ludicrous than in fact it was? Hasn’t that
invisible and spiritual bond loosened which held the state together politically?
Isn’t the power of religion, which held fast to the invisible, weakened and
destroyed? Haven’t the statesmen and clergy this in common, that like the augurs
of old they find it hard to look at one another without smiling?
4 Our age certainly
has one peculiarity to a greater degree than Greece, namely that it is more
melancholy and hence deeper in despair. Our age is thus melancholy enough to
realize there is something called responsibility and that it has some significance.
So while everyone wants to rule, no one wants the responsibility. It is still fresh
in our memory that a French statesman, on being offered a portfolio for a second
time, declared that he would accept on the condition that the secretary of state be
made responsible.
5 The King of France, we all know, has no responsibility, while
his minister has; the minister does not want to be responsible but wants to be
minister provided the secretary of state becomes responsible. Naturally, the end
result is that the watchmen or street wardens become responsible.
6 What a
subject for Aristophanes, this upside-down tale of responsibility! On the other
hand, why is it the government and rulers are so afraid of assuming
responsibility, if not because they fear an opposition party that seeks to evade
responsibility through its own ladder of command? When one imagines these
two powers in mutual opposition but unable to come to grips with each other
because the one constantly evades the other, because the one only makes its
obeisances before the other, a set-up like that would certainly not lack comic
effect. This is enough to show that the real bonds of the state have dissolved, yet
the isolation thus incurred is naturally comic, and the comedy is that subjectivity
wants to assert itself as mere form. All isolated individuals always become
comic by asserting their own accidental individuality in the face of evolutionary
necessity. There is no doubt that it would be most deeply comical to have some
accidental individual come by the universal idea of wanting to be the saviour of
the whole world. On the other hand, the appearance of Christ is in a certain sense
the deepest tragedy (in another sense it is infinitely more), because Christ came
in the fullness of time, and – a point I must particularly stress in connection with
what follows – He bore the sins of all the world.
Aristotle, we know, mentions two things, dianoia and ethos [thought and
character], as the source of the action in tragedy. But he remarks also that the
main thing is the telos [end or completion], and the individuals do not act in
order to portray characters but the latter are included for the sake of the action.
7
One quickly notes a departure here from modern tragedy. The peculiarity of
ancient tragedy is that the action does not proceed from character alone, that the
action is not reflected enough in the acting subject, but has a relative admixture
of suffering. Nor is it the case that ancient tragedy has developed dialogue to the
point of exhaustive reflection, so that everything can be absorbed in that. In the
monologue and the chorus it does in fact possess the separate elements of
dialogue. Whether the chorus approaches the substantiality of epic or the
exaltation of lyric, it still points in a way to that extra which will not be absorbed
in individuality. The monologue, for its part, has more of the concentration of
lyric and its extra is what will not be absorbed in action and situation. In ancient
tragedy the action itself possesses an epic feature; it is just as much event as
action. The reason is of course to be found in the fact that in the ancient world
subjectivity was not fully conscious and reflective. Even though the individual
moved freely, he still depended on substantial categories, on state, family, and
destiny. This category of the substantial is the authentically fatalistic element in
Greek tragedy, and its true peculiarity. The hero’s downfall is therefore not the
outcome simply of his own action, it is also a suffering, while in modern tragedy
the downfall of the hero is really not suffering but action. In modem times,
therefore, it is really situation and character that predominate. The tragic hero is
subjectively reflected in himself, and this reflection hasn’t simply refracted him
out of every immediate relation to state, race, and destiny, often it has refracted
him even out of his own preceding life. What interests us is some certain definite
moment of his life as his own deed. Because of this, the tragic element can be
exhaustively represented in situation and words, there being nothing whatever
left over of the immediate. Hence modern tragedy has no epic foreground, no
epic heritage. The hero stands and falls entirely on his own deeds.
The significance of this brief but adequate account is to illuminate a difference
between ancient and modern tragedy which I consider of great importance: the
different kinds of tragic guilt. Aristotle, as we know, requires the tragic hero to
have hamartia [guilt]
8
. But just as the action in Greek tragedy is something
intermediate between activity and passivity, so too is the guilt, and in this lies the
tragic collision. On the other hand, the more the subjectivity becomes reflected,
or the more one sees the individual, in the Pelagian manner, left to himself, the
more the guilt becomes ethical.
9 Between these two extremes lies the tragic. If
the individual is entirely without guilt, the tragic interest is removed, for the
tragic collision loses its power. If, on the other hand, he is guilty absolutely, he
can no longer interest us tragically. So it is surely a misunderstanding of the
tragic that our age strives to have the whole tragic destiny become
transubstantiated in individuality and subjectivity. One turns a deaf ear on the
hero’s past life, one throws his whole life upon his shoulders as his own doing,
makes him accountable for everything; but in so doing one also transforms his
aesthetic guilt into an ethical guilt. The tragic hero thus becomes bad. Evil
becomes the real object of tragedy. But evil has no aesthetic interest, and sin is
not an aesthetic element. No doubt this mistaken endeavour has its origin in the
whole tendency of our age to work towards the comic. The comic is to be found
precisely in the isolation. If you try to let the tragic take effect inside this
isolation, you get the evil in all its baseness, not the properly tragic guilt in its
ambiguous innocence. It isn’t hard to find examples when one looks about in
modern literature. Thus that in many ways brilliant work of Grabbe’s, Faust und
Don Juan, is really built around the notion of evil.
10 However, so as not to argue
from just a single work, I shall indicate this instead in the general consciousness
of the age as a whole. If one wanted to portray someone upon whom an unhappy
childhood had had so disturbing an effect that the experiences in question were
the cause of his downfall, a thing like that would simply have no appeal for the
present age – and not of course because it was badly handled, for I can certainly
take for granted that it would be handled with distinction, but because our age
sets another standard. It won’t listen to such effeminacy; it holds the individual
responsible for his own life, without further ado. So if he goes to the dogs it isn’t
tragic but bad. It leads you to think this must be a kingdom of gods, this
generation in which I too have the honour to live. However, that is by no means
the case; the energy, the courage, which would thus be the creator of its own
fortune, yes, the creator of itself, is an illusion and in losing the tragic the age
gains despair. There is a sadness and a healing power in the tragic which truly
one should not despise, and when one wants, in the larger-than-life manner of
our age, to gain oneself, one loses oneself and becomes comical. Every
individual, however original, is still a child of God, of his age, of his nation, of
his family, of his friends. Only thus does he have his truth. If in all this relativity
he tries to be the absolute, he becomes ridiculous. In language one sometimes
finds a word which, used in a particular case because of the construction, ends
up by having independence declared on its behalf, if you will, as an adverb in
that particular case.
11 For the experts a word like this acquires an emphasis and
weakness it never recovers from. Should it seek recognition as a substantive all
the same and insist on its right to be inflected in all five cases, it would be truly
comic. And so, too, with the individual when, fetched perhaps with difficulty
from the womb of time, he wants in this monstrous relativity to be absolute. But
if he renounces the claim of the absolute in order to become relative, then eo
ipso the tragic is his, even if he were the happiest of individuals; indeed I would
say that it is only when the individual has the tragic that he becomes happy.
The tragic contains an infinite leniency; really it is what divine love and mercy
are, but from the aesthetic perspective on human life; it is even milder, and so I
would say it was a maternal love which soothes the troubled. The ethical is strict
and harsh. So if a criminal pleads to the judge that his mother had a propensity
for stealing, and particularly at the time she was carrying him, the judge secures
the Board of Health’s opinion of his mental condition and decides that what he is
dealing with is a thief and not a thief’s mother. Since we are talking about a
crime, the sinner can’t very well flee to the temple of aesthetics, and yet the
aesthetic will put in an extenuating word for him. Still, it would be wrong for
him to seek comfort there, for his path leads him not to the aesthetic but to the
religious. The aesthetic lies behind him, and it would be a new sin for him now
to grasp at the aesthetic. The religious is the expression of a paternal love, since
it contains the ethical but in a mollified form. And mollified by what? Precisely
by what gives the tragic its leniency: continuity. But while the aesthetic gives
this pause before the profound opposition of sin is pressed home, the religious
does not give it until after this opposition is seen in all its fearfulness. Just when
the sinner is about to sink under the general sin which he has taken upon himself,
because he felt that the more guilty he became the better his prospects for
salvation – in that same moment of terror, consolation appears in the fact that it
is a general sinfulness which has asserted itself, now also in him. But this is a
religious consolation, and he who thinks to attain it in some other way, for
instance by aesthetic volatilization, has taken this consolation in vain and doesn’t
really possess it. In a sense, then, it is a very proper tactic of the age to hold the
individual responsible for everything. But the unfortunate thing is that the age
does not do it deeply and inwardly enough, and hence its vacillation. It has
enough conceit of itself to disdain tragedy’s tears, but it also has enough selfconceit to dispense with divine mercy. But then what is human life when we take
these two things away? What is the human race? Either the sadness of the tragic,
or the profound sorrow and profound joy of religion. Or is that not the
peculiarity of everything that emanates from that happy people – a melancholy, a
sadness, in its art, in its poetry, in its life, in its joy?
In the preceding I have mainly sought to underline the difference between
ancient and modern tragedy, so far as this becomes clear in differences in the
tragic hero’s guilt. This is really the focus from which all other characteristic
differences radiate. If the hero is unequivocally guilty, the monologue disappears
and with it destiny. The thought is transparent in the dialogue, and the action in
the situation. The same can be put from another point of view with regard to the
mood evoked by the tragedy. Aristotle, as we know, requires that tragedy should
arouse fear and pity in the spectator. I recollect that Hegel aligns himself with
this view in his Aesthetics and embarks on a double, though not particularly
exhaustive, reflection on each of these points.
12
In respect of Aristotle’s
distinction between fear and pity, one could interpret fear as the mood
accompanying the particular event, and pity as the mood forming the definite
impression. It is the latter that I have most in mind, because it is this that
corresponds to tragic guilt, and so it has the same dialectic as that concept. Now
Hegel observes in this connection that there are two kinds of compassion, the
ordinary kind concerned with the finite aspect of suffering, and true tragic pity.
This, indeed, is correct, but for me of less importance, since the common
emotion is a misunderstanding which can just as well apply to ancient as to
modern tragedy. What Hegel adds regarding true pity, however, is straight to the
point: ‘True pity, on the contrary, is sympathy at the same time with the
sufferer’s justification.’
13 While Hegel considers compassion in general and its
differences in individual variation, I prefer to underline differences in
compassion as they are related to differences in tragic guilt. To make the point in
a trice I shall let the passion in the word ‘compassion’ be split up and ascribe the
sympathy which the word expresses to every man, without saying anything
about the mood of the spectator that might be traced to his contingency but in
such a way that, in explaining the difference in his mood, I also express the
difference in the tragic guilt.
In ancient tragedy the sorrow is deeper, the pain less; in modern tragedy, the
pain is greater, the sorrow less. Sorrow always contains something more
substantial than pain. Pain always indicates a reflection on suffering which
sorrow does not know. It is very interesting, from a psychological standpoint, to
watch a child when it sees an older person suffer. The child hasn’t sufficient
reflection to feel pain, and yet its sorrow is infinitely deep. It hasn’t sufficient
reflection to have a conception of sin and guilt, so when it sees an older person
suffer, it does not occur to it to think about it, and yet when the cause of the
suffering is concealed from it, there is a dim presentiment of it in its sorrow.
Such too, though in complete and profound harmony, is the Greek sorrow, and
that is why it is at one and the same time so gentle and so deep. But when an
older person sees someone younger, a child, suffer, his pain is greater, his sorrow
less. The more clear the conception of guilt, the greater the pain and the less
profound the sorrow. Applying this, then, to the relation between ancient and
modern tragedy, one has to say: in ancient tragedy, the sorrow is deeper, and in
the corresponding consciousness, too, the sorrow is deeper. For one must always
bear in mind that the sorrow lies not in me, but in the tragedy, and that to
understand the deep sorrow of Greek tragedy I must enter into the Greek
consciousness. Often, then, it is surely only affectation when so many people
profess to admire Greek tragedy; for it is obvious that our age has at least no
great sympathy with the real character of Greek sorrow. The sorrow of Greek
tragedy is deeper because the guilt has the ambiguity of the aesthetic. In modem
times the pain is greater. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living
God,
14
that is what one might say about Greek tragedy. The wrath of the gods is
terrible, yet the pain is not so great as in modern tragedy, where the hero suffers
all his guilt, is transparent to himself in his own suffering of his guilt.
Here, as with tragic guilt, we must show what is the true aesthetic sorrow and
what the true aesthetic pain. Now, obviously the bitterest pain is remorse, but
remorse has an ethical, not an aesthetic, reality. It is the bitterest pain because it
has all of guilt’s total transparency, but just because of this transparency it has no
aesthetic interest. Remorse has a holiness which obscures the aesthetic. It won’t
be seen, least of all by the spectator, and it requires quite a different kind of selfactivity. True, modern comedy has sometimes presented remorse on the stage,
but this just shows lack of judgement on the part of the author. Perhaps it has to
do with the thought of the psychological interest one may have in seeing remorse
portrayed, but then again, psychological interest is not the aesthetic. This is part
of the confusion evident in so many ways in our age: we look for a thing where
we ought not to look for it; and worse, we find it where we ought not to find it.
We want to be edified in the theatre, to be influenced aesthetically in church, to
be converted by novels, to enjoy books of devotion; we want philosophy in the
pulpit and the preacher in the professorial chair. This pain is accordingly not
aesthetic pain, yet clearly it is this the modern age works towards as its highest
tragic interest. The same is true of tragic guilt. Our age has lost all the substantial
categories of family, state and race. It has to leave the individual entirely to
himself, so that in a stricter sense he becomes his own creator. His guilt is
therefore sin, his pain remorse. But the tragic is then done away with. And what
is, in a stricter sense, the tragedy of suffering has really lost its tragic interest, for
the power from which the suffering comes has lost its meaning, and the spectator
cries: ‘Heaven helps those who help themselves!’ In other words, the spectator
has lost his compassion. But compassion is, in an objective as well as a
subjective sense, the authentic expression of the tragic.
For clarity’s sake, and before going further with this account, I shall identify
true aesthetic sorrow a little more closely. Sorrow has the opposite movement to
that of pain. So long as one doesn’t spoil things out of a misplaced mania for
consistency – something I shall prevent also in another way – one may say: the
more innocence, the deeper the sorrow. If you press this too far, you destroy the
tragic. There is always an element of guilt left over, but it is never properly
reflected in the subject; which is why in Greek tragedy the sorrow is so deep. In
order to prevent misplaced consistency, I shall merely remark that exaggeration
only succeeds in carrying the matter over into another sphere. The synthesis of
absolute innocence and absolute guilt is not an aesthetic feature but a
metaphysical one. This is the real reason why people have always been ashamed
to call the life of Christ a tragedy; one feels instinctively that aesthetic categories
do not exhaust the matter. It is clear in another way, too, that Christ’s life
amounts to more than can be exhausted in aesthetic terms, namely from the fact
that these terms neutralize themselves in this phenomenon, and are rendered
irrelevant. Tragic action always contains an element of suffering, and tragic
suffering an element of action; the aesthetic lies in the relativity. The identity of
an absolute action and an absolute suffering is beyond the powers of aesthetics
and belongs to metaphysics. This identity is exemplified in the life of Christ, for
His suffering is absolute because the action is absolutely free, and His action is
absolute suffering because it is absolute obedience. The element of guilt that is
always left over is, accordingly, not subjectively reflected and this makes the
sorrow deep. Tragic guilt is more than just subjective guilt, it is inherited guilt.
But inherited guilt, like original sin, is a substantial category, and it is just this
substantiality that makes the sorrow deeper. Sophocles’ celebrated tragic trilogy,
Oedipus at Colonus, Oedipus Rex and Antigone, turns essentially on this
authentic tragic interest. But inherited guilt contains the self-contradiction of
being guilt yet not being guilt. The bond that makes the individual guilty is
precisely piety, but the guilt which he thereby incurs has all possible aesthetic
ambiguity. One might well conclude that the people who developed profound
tragedy were the Jews. Thus, when they say of Jehovah that he is a jealous God
who visits the sins of the fathers on the children unto the third and the fourth
generations,
15 or one hears those terrible imprecations in the Old Testament, one
might feel tempted to look here for the material of tragedy. But Judaism is too
ethically developed for this. Jehovah’s curses, terrible as they are, are
nevertheless also righteous punishment. Such was not the case in Greece, there
the wrath of the gods has no ethical character, but aesthetic ambiguity.
In Greek tragedy itself we find a transition from sorrow to pain, and as an
example of this I must mention the Philoctetes.
16 This is, in the stricter sense, a
tragedy of suffering. But here, too, there is a high degree of objectivity. The
Greek hero reposes in his fate, his fate is unchangeable, there is nothing further
to be said about it. This factor furnishes the element of sorrow in the pain. The
first doubt with which pain really begins is this: why has this befallen me, why
can it not be otherwise? It is true that in the Philoctetes there is – and this is
something that has always struck me as remarkable and as essentially
distinguishing this piece from the immortal trilogy – a high degree of reflection:
the masterly portrayal of the self-contradiction in his pain, which contains so
deep a human truth while an objectivity still sustains the whole.
17 Philoctetes’
reflection doesn’t become absorbed in itself, and it is typically Greek that he
complains that no one understands his pain. There is an exceptional truth in this,
and yet it is just here that the difference shows between his pain and the
reflective pain that always wants to be alone in its pain, which seeks a new pain
in this solitude of pain.
True tragic sorrow accordingly requires an element of guilt, true tragic pain an
element of innocence. True tragic sorrow requires an element of transparency,
true tragic pain an element of opaqueness. This I believe best indicates the
dialectic in which the categories of sorrow and pain come in contact with each
other, as well as the dialectic inherent in the concept of tragic guilt.
Seeing it is contrary to the spirit of our Society to produce closely coherent
works or greater wholes. Seeing it is not our purpose to labour upon a Tower of
Babel which God in His righteousness can descend upon and destroy. Seeing
that we, conscious of the justness of that confusion of tongues, recognize the
fragmentary as a characteristic of all human striving in its truth and realize that it
is precisely this that distinguishes it from the infinite coherence of Nature, that
an individual’s wealth consists precisely in his power of fragmentary
extravagance, and that the producer’s enjoyment is also that of the receiver, not
the laborious and meticulous execution, nor the protracted apprehension of this
execution, but rather the production and enjoyment of that gleaming transience
which for the producer contains something more than the completed effort, since
it is the appearance of the Idea, and which for the recipient, too, contains a
surplus, seeing that its fulguration awakens his own productivity – since all this,
I say, is contrary to our Society’s penchant (and since, indeed, even the period
just read could well be regarded as a disquieting attack upon the interjectory
style in which the idea breaks out but without breaking through, a style which in
our Society is accorded official status), then, having called attention to the fact
that my conduct still cannot be called rebellious, seeing that the bond holding
this period together is so loose that the intermediary clauses stand out in a
sufficiently aphoristic and arbitrary manner, I shall merely call to mind that my
style has made an attempt to appear to be what it is not – revolutionary.
This Society demands at every one of its meetings a renewal and rebirth, and
for the following reason: that its inner activity may be rejuvenated by a new
description of its productivity. Let us then describe our purpose as essays in the
fragmentary endeavour, or in the art of writing posthumous papers. A fully
completed work has no relation to the poetic personality; with posthumous
papers one constantly feels, because of their broken-off, desultory character, a
need to imagine the personality as being a part. Posthumous papers are like a
ruin, and what haunt could be more natural for the interred? The art is therefore
artistically to produce the same effect, the same carelessness and contingency,
the same anacoluthic flight of thought. The art is to produce an enjoyment which
never actually becomes present, but always has in it an element of the past, so
that it is present in the past. This is already expressed in the word ‘posthumous’.
In a sense everything a writer produces is posthumous, yet one would never
think of calling a completed work posthumous, even if it possessed the
accidental quality of not having been published in his lifetime. Also, it is, I
assume, a characteristic of all human productivity, as we have apprehended it,
that it is an inheritance, since it is not men’s privilege to live in the everlasting
sight of the gods. Inheritance [Efterladenskab] is therefore what I shall call what
is produced among us, an artistic inheritance; negligence [Efterladenhed],
indolence, I shall call the genius that we appreciate; vis inertiae,
18
the natural law
that we worship. In saying this I have complied with our sacred customs and
rules.
So draw nearer to me, dear Symparanekromenoi, gather round me as I send my
tragic heroine out into the world, as I give to the daughter of sorrow as her
wedding gift a dowry of pain. She is my creation, yet her outline is so vague, her
form so nebulous, that each one of you is free to fall for her and to love her in
your own way. She is my creation, her thoughts are my thoughts, and yet it is as
if I had lain with her in a night of love, as if she had entrusted me with her deep
secret, breathed forth both it and her soul in my embrace, and as if the same
instant she was transformed before me, had vanished so that her reality could
only be traced in the mood that lingered on; instead of the opposite being true,
that she was born to greater and greater reality from my own mood. I put words
in her mouth, and yet to me it is as though I abused her confidence, she seems to
stand reproachfully behind me; yet it is the other way around, in her secrecy she
becomes more and more visible. She is my possession, my lawful possession,
and yet sometimes it is as if I had crept into her confidence, slyly, as if I must
constantly look round to find her behind me; and yet it is the other way around,
she is constantly in front of me, she comes into existence only when I bring her
forth. She is called Antigone. This name I retain from the ancient tragedy, which
in general I shall follow, except that everything will be modern. But first a
remark. I use a feminine figure because I really believe that a feminine nature is
best suited to showing the difference. As a woman, she will have the
substantiality needed for sorrow to be revealed, but as a member of a reflective
world, she will have reflection enough to experience pain. In order to experience
sorrow, tragic guilt must vacillate between guilt and innocence; what conveys
the guilt into her consciousness must always be some substantial feature. But
since, in order to experience sorrow, tragic guilt must have this vagueness,
reflection must not be present in its infinitude, for then it would refract her out of
her guilt, since reflection in its infinite subjectivity cannot allow the element of
inherited guilt to which sorrow is due to remain. Since, however, her reflection is
awakened, it will not refract her out of her sorrow but into it, at every moment
transforming her sorrow into pain.
Labdacus’s family, then, is the object of the angry gods’ indignation.
19 Oedipus
has killed the sphinx, liberated Thebes; he has murdered his father, married his
mother, and Antigone is the fruit of that marriage. Thus it is with the Greek
tragedy. Here I depart from it. I keep all the facts of the case just as they are, yet
everything is different. That he has slain the sphinx and liberated Thebes, we all
know. And Oedipus lives honoured and admired, happy in his marriage with
Jocasta. The rest is concealed from the eyes of men, and no presentiment has
ever summoned this horrible nightmare out into reality. Only Antigone knows it.
How she has come to know it falls outside the tragic interest, and everyone is
free to concoct his own explanation. At an early age, before she is yet fully
matured, vague suspicions of this horrible secret have now and then gripped her
soul, until with a single blow certainty casts her into the arms of anxiety. Here,
straightaway, I am given my definition of the modern idea of the tragic. For
anxiety is a reflection, and in this it differs essentially from sorrow. Anxiety is
the organ through which the subject appropriates sorrow and assimilates it.
Anxiety is the energy of the movement by which sorrow bores its way into the
heart. But the movement is not swift like the arrow’s, it is gradual. It is not once
and for all, but in constant becoming. As a passionate, erotic glance desires its
object, anxiety looks at sorrow in order to desire it. As a quiet, incorruptible
glance of love is preoccupied with the beloved object, anxiety preoccupies itself
with sorrow. But anxiety contains something extra which makes it cling even
more strongly to its object, for it both loves and fears it. Anxiety has a double
function. It is the movement of discovery that constantly touches, and by
fingering it, discovers sorrow by going around it. Or anxiety is sudden, positing
the whole sorrow in the here and now, yet in such a way that this here and now
instantly dissolves into succession. Anxiety in this sense is a genuinely tragic
category, and this is where the old saying quern deus vult perdere, primum
dementat
20 comes properly into its own. The fact that anxiety is a phenomenon
of reflection is something language itself indicates; for I always say ‘to be
anxious about something’, thus separating the anxiety from that about which I
am anxious; I can never use anxiety to refer to its object. Whereas, if I say ‘my
sorrow’, this, on the contrary, can express what I sorrow over just as much as my
sorrow over it. Anxiety, furthermore, always involves a reflection upon time, for
I cannot be anxious about the present, only about the past or the future; but the
past and the future, holding on to each other so tightly that the present vanishes,
are reflective phenomena. Greek sorrow, on the contrary, like the whole of Greek
life, is in the present tense, and therefore the sorrow is deeper but the pain less.
So anxiety is essential to the tragic. Hence Hamlet is deeply tragic because he
suspects his mother’s guilt. Robert le Diable asks how he could ever have come
to cause so much evil.
21 Hogne, whom his mother had begotten with a troll,
happening to see his image in the water, asks his mother how his body acquired
such a shape.
22
The difference is now plain to see. In the Greek tragedy Antigone is not at all
concerned about her father’s unhappy destiny. This rests like an impenetrable
sorrow over the whole family. Antigone lives as carefree a life as any other
young Greek girl; indeed the chorus pities her, seeing her death is preordained,
because she is to quit this life at so early an age, quit it without having tasted its
most beautiful joys, evidently forgetting the family’s own deep sorrow. That
doesn’t at all imply frivolity, or mean that the particular individual stands alone
by himself, unconcerned with his relationship to the family. It is authentically
Greek. Life-relationships are assigned to them once and for all, just like the
heaven under which they live. If that is dark and cloudy it is also unchangeable.
It gives the soul a keynote, and that is sorrow, not pain. In Antigone, tragic guilt
focuses on a definite point: that she had buried her brother in defiance of the
king’s prohibition. If this is seen as an isolated fact, as a collision between
sisterly affection and piety and an arbitrary human prohibition, then the Antigone
would cease to be a Greek tragedy, it would be an altogether modern tragic
subject. What in the Greek sense provides tragic interest is the fact that, in the
brother’s unhappy death, in the sister’s collision with a single human
circumstance, there is a re-echoing of Oedipus’s sorry fate; it is, one might say,
the afterpains, the tragic destiny of Oedipus, ramifying in every branch of his
family. This totality makes the spectator’s sorrow infinitely deep. It is not an
individual that goes under, but a little world; the objective sorrow, set free, now
strides forward with its own terrible consistency, like a force of nature, and
Antigone’s sorry fate is like an echo of her father’s, an intensified sorrow. So
when Antigone, in defiance of the king’s prohibition, resolves to bury her
brother, we see in this not so much a free action on her part as a fateful necessity
which visits the sins of the fathers on the children. There is indeed enough
freedom here to make us love Antigone for her sisterly love, but in the necessity
of fate there is also, as it were, a higher refrain enveloping not just the life of
Oedipus, but all his family too.
So while the Greek Antigone lives a life free enough from care for us to
imagine her life in its gradual unfolding as even being a happy one if this new
fact had not emerged, our Antigone’s life is, on the contrary, essentially over. It
is no stingy endowment I have given her, and as we say that an aptly spoken
word is like apples of gold in pictures of silver, so here have I placed the fruit of
sorrow in a cup of pain. Her dowry is not a vain splendour which moth and rust
can corrupt,
23
it is an eternal treasure. Thieves cannot break in and steal it; she
herself will be too vigilant for that. Her life does not unfold like that of the
Greek Antigone; it is not turned outward but inward. The scene is not external
but internal, a scene of the spirit.
Have I not succeeded, dear Symparanekromenoi, in arousing your interest in
such a girl, or must I resort to a captatio benevolentiae?
24 She, too, does not
belong to the world she lives in; however flourishing and healthy, her real life is
clandestine. She, too, though living, has in another sense departed; quiet is that
life and hidden, not even a sigh does the world hear, for her sigh is hidden in the
privacy of her soul. I need not remind you that she is by no means a weak and
sickly woman, quite the contrary, she is vigorous and proud. Perhaps nothing
ennobles a human being so much as keeping a secret. It gives a man’s whole life
a meaning, though one that it has only for him. It saves him from every vain
regard for his environment; sufficient unto himself, he rests blessed in his secret
– we can almost say that, even if his secret were the most sinister. Such is our
Antigone. Proud of her secret, proud that she has been chosen to save in so
remarkable a manner the honour and esteem of the house of Oedipus; and when
the grateful people cheer Oedipus and applaud him, she is conscious of the role
she is playing, and her secret sinks deeper into her soul, even more inaccessible
to any living being. She feels how much has been placed in her hands, and this
gives her the larger-than-life dimension needed for her to engage us as a tragic
personality. She must interest us as an individual figure. More than just a
common young girl, she is yet a young girl; she is a bride, but in all innocence
and purity. As a bride, woman achieves her destiny, and ordinarily a woman can
interest us only to the degree that she is brought into relation to this her destiny.
But there are analogies here. One says of a bride of God that it is faith and spirit
that provide the substance in which she rests. I would call our Antigone a bride
in perhaps an even more beautiful sense, indeed she is almost more than that, she
is mother; in the purely aesthetic sense she is virgo mater,
25 she bears her secret
under her heart, out of sight and undetected. She is silence precisely because she
is secretive, but this self-withdrawal, implicit in silence, makes her larger than
life. Proud of her sorrow, she is jealous over it, for her sorrow is her love. Yet her
sorrow is not a dead, immovable possession: it is constantly in motion, it gives
birth to pain and is born in pain. As when a girl resolves to dedicate her life to an
idea, when she stands there with the sacrificial wreath upon her brow she is a
bride, for the great inspirational idea transforms her and the votive wreath is like
a bridal garland. She knows not any man, yet she is a bride; she knows not even
the idea that inspires her, for that would be unwomanly. Yet she is a bride.
Such is our Antigone, the bride of sorrow. She consecrates her life to sorrow
over her father’s destiny, over her own. A misfortune such as has overtaken her
father calls for sorrow, yet there is no one who can grieve over it, because there
is no one who has knowledge of it. And as the Greek Antigone cannot bear to
have her brother’s corpse flung away without the last honours, so she feels how
cruel it would be should no one come to know of this; it troubles her that no
tears should be shed; she practically thanks the gods because she has been
chosen as this instrument. Thus is Antigone great in her pain. Here, too, I can
indicate a difference between Greek and modern tragedy. It is genuinely Greek
for Philoctetes to complain that there is no one who knows what he suffers; it is
an expression of a deep human need to want others to realize this. Reflective
grief, however, has no such desire; it does not occur to Antigone to wish that
anyone should learn of her pain. But she feels it in relation to her father, she feels
the justice of having to suffer grief, which is just as proper aesthetically as that a
man should suffer punishment if he has done wrong. So while it is the idea of her
being about to be buried alive that first wrings from the Antigone of the Greek
tragedy this outburst of grief:
O hapless alien,
Lodged with neither mortal man nor corpse,
Not with the living nor yet with the dead,
26
our own Antigone can say this about herself all her life. The difference is
striking; there is a factual truth in the former’s assertion that makes the pain less.
If our Antigone were to say the same, it would be unreal, but it is this unreality
which is the real pain. The Greeks do not express themselves figuratively,
precisely because the reflection that goes with this was not present in their lives.
So when Philoctetes complains that he lives solitary and forsaken on a desert
island, what he says is also an outward truth. But when our Antigone feels pain
in her solitude, it is only in a figurative sense that she is alone. Yet just for that
reason, her pain is real pain.
As far as the tragic guilt goes, on the one hand it lies in the fact that she buries
her brother, but also partly in the context of her father’s sorry fate, which is
presupposed from the two preceding tragedies. Here again I come to the peculiar
dialectic which puts the guilt of Oedipus’s house in relation to the individual.
This is hereditary guilt. Dialectics is commonly considered fairly abstract; one
thinks usually of logical steps. However, one soon learns from life that there are
many kinds of dialectic, that nearly every passion has its own. So the dialectic
which puts the guilt of the race or family in connection with the particular
subject, so that the latter is not just a passive sufferer under it – for that is a
natural consequence one would try in vain to steel oneself against – but bears the
guilt along with the suffering, participates in it, this dialectic is foreign to us,
does not compel us. But if one were to envisage a rebirth out of ancient tragedy,
then every individual would have to be concerned about his own rebirth, not just
in a spiritual sense, but in the definite sense of a rebirth from the womb of family
and race. The dialectic which puts the individual in connection with family and
race is no subjective dialectic, for what that does is precisely to remove the
connection and take the individual out of the network of relationships. No, it is
an objective dialectic. Essentially it is piety, and to preserve piety cannot be
considered in any way harmful to the individual. In our time one allows in
respect of nature what one is loth to allow in matters of spirit. Still, one would
not wish to be so isolated, so unnatural, as not to regard the family as a whole, of
which one must say that if one member suffers, then all suffer. This one does
involuntarily, and why else should a particular individual fear lest another
member of the family brings disgrace upon it, if not because he feels that he, too,
will suffer the disgrace? This suffering the individual must obviously take along
with him, whether he wants to or not. But since the point of departure here is the
individual not the family, this enforced suffering is maximum; one senses that
mankind cannot be complete master over its natural circumstances, yet still
wants to be so as far as possible. If, on the other hand, the individual looks on
the natural tie as a factor involved in his own truth, the way to express this in the
spiritual world is: the individual participates in the guilt. This is an implication
many people would perhaps be unable to grasp, but then neither could they grasp
the tragic. If the individual is isolated, he is either absolutely the creator of his
own destiny, in which case nothing tragic remains, but only the evil – for it is not
even tragic for an individual to be blinded by or engrossed in himself, it is his
own doing – or individuals are nothing but modifications of the eternal substance
of existence, and so once again the tragic is lost.
Regarding tragic guilt, a difference in the modern version comes readily to
view only after the latter has discerned the ancient within it, for only then can we
speak of this. The Greek Antigone participates in her father’s guilt through filial
piety, as does also our modern one. But for the Greek Antigone her father’s guilt
and suffering is an external fact, an immovable fact, which her sorrow does not
alter (quod non volvit in pectore);
27 and in so far as she herself, as a natural
consequence, personally suffers under her father’s guilt, this again is an
altogether external fact. With our Antigone it is otherwise. I assume now that
Oedipus is dead. Even while he lived Antigone had been aware of this secret but
lacked the courage to confide in her father. His death has deprived her of the
only means by which she could be freed from her secret. Confiding it now to any
living being would be to disgrace her father; the meaning her life acquires for
her is in its dedication, through her inviolable silence, to showing him the last
honours daily, almost hourly. There is one thing, however, of which she is
ignorant. She does not know whether her father himself knew. This is the
modern feature; the disquietude in her sorrow, the ambiguity in her pain. She
loves her father with all her soul, and this love draws her out of herself and into
her father’s guilt. The fruit of such love is a sense of alienation from mankind;
she feels her own guilt the more she loves her father; only with him can she find
rest, so that, equally guilty, they would grieve with each other. But while her
father was living she had been unable to confide her sorrow to him, for she did
not know whether he knew about it, and so there was a possibility of plunging
him into a similar pain. And yet, was he less guilty for not knowing about it?
The movement here is constantly relative. Had Antigone not known the
circumstances with certainty, she would lack significance, she would have
nothing but a suspicion to struggle with, and in that there is too little of the tragic
to interest us. But she does know everything; yet even in this knowledge there is
still an ignorance which can always keep sorrow in motion, always transform it
into pain. In addition, she is constantly at odds with her external surroundings.
Oedipus lives in the people’s memory as a king favoured by fortune, honoured
and feted; Antigone herself has admired as well as loved her father. She takes
part in every celebration in his honour, she enthuses over her father as none other
in the realm, her thoughts constantly return to him, she is praised throughout the
land as a model of a loving daughter. Yet this enthusiasm is her only way of
giving vent to her sorrow. Her father is always in her thoughts, but how is he in
those thoughts? – that is her painful secret. And yet she dare not give in to her
sorrow, dare not openly fret; she feels how much depends on her, she fears that if
anyone saw her suffering, people would pick up the trail, and so from this side,
too, what she gets is not sorrow but pain.
Expanded and reworked in this way, I think we can very well find interest in
Antigone. I think you will not reproach me for frivolity or paternal partiality
when I believe that she might well try her hand at the tragic disciplines and
venture an appearance in a tragedy. Hitherto she has only been an epic figure,
and the tragic in her only held an epic interest.
Nor is it all that hard to find a context in which she could fit. In this respect we
can just as well make do with the one provided by the Greek tragedy. She has a
sister living. Let’s have her rather older than Antigone and married. Her mother
could also be living. That these will naturally always be minor characters goes
without saying, as also the fact that in general the tragedy acquires an epic
element, as the Greek one does, though it need not be so very conspicuous on
that account. Still, the monologue will always play a principal role here, even if
the situation ought to come to its assistance. One has to imagine everything
united around this one main interest which comprises the content of Antigone’s
life, and when everything has been put in order, the question arises: how is the
dramatic interest to be brought home?
Our heroine, as she has presented herself in the foregoing, is set on wanting to
skip over an element in her life; she is on the point of wanting to live in a wholly
spiritual manner, something nature does not tolerate. With her depth of soul she
needs to love with an extraordinary passion, if she does fall in love. Here, then, I
have the dramatic interest – Antigone is in love, and I say it with pain, Antigone
is mortally in love. Here manifestly is the dramatic collision. In general one
should be rather more particular about what to refer to as dramatic collision. The
more sympathetic the colliding forces are, and the deeper but also more
homogeneous they are, the more significant the collision. So she is in love, and
the object of her affection is not ignorant of this fact. Now, my Antigone is no
ordinary woman, and so her dowry, too, is unusual – it is her pain. Without this
dowry she cannot belong to a man, that she feels would be too high a risk; to
conceal it from such an observer would be impossible; to want to have concealed
it would be to sin against her love. But can she belong to him with it? Dare she
confide it to any human being, even to a beloved husband? Antigone has
strength; the question is not whether to reveal something of her pain for her own
sake, to lighten her heart, for this indeed she can bear without support. But can
she justify this to the dead? She herself would suffer, too, in a way, by confiding
her secret to her husband, for her own life too is grievously interwoven in it.
This, however, does not trouble her. The only question concerns her father. From
this angle, therefore, the collision is of a sympathetic nature. Her life, formerly
peaceful and quiet, now becomes violent and passionate, always of course within
herself, and her words here begin to fill with pathos. She struggles with herself,
she has been willing to sacrifice her life to her secret, but now what is demanded
as a sacrifice is her love. She wins – that is to say, the secret wins and she loses.
Then comes the second collision, because in order for the tragic collision to be
really profound, the colliding forces must be homogeneous. The collision
described up to now lacked this quality, for the real collision is between her love
for her father and her love for herself, and whether her own love is not too great
a sacrifice. The other colliding force is the sympathetic love for her beloved. He
knows he is loved, and boldly sues for her hand. Doubtless her reserve puzzles
him, he notes that there must be some quite special difficulties, but not
insurmountable ones. The all-important thing for him is to convince her how
much he loves her, yes, persuade her that his life is over if he must waive his
claim to her love. His passion becomes at last something almost unreal, but then
only the more inventive because of her resistance. Every assurance of his love
increases her pain, with every sigh he buries the dart of sorrow ever deeper into
her heart. He leaves no means untried to persuade her. Like everyone else, he
knows how much she loved her father. He meets her at Oedipus’s grave, to
which she has repaired to ease her heart, where she abandons herself to her
yearning for her father, even though this very yearning is mingled with pain, for
she knows not how a new encounter with him might be, whether he was
cognisant of his guilt. Her lover surprises her and beseeches her in the name of
the love with which she enfolds her father; he sees that the impression he is
making on her is an unusual one, but he persists, he puts all his hope in this
means, and he doesn’t know that in doing so he has defeated his own intentions.
What the interest focuses on, then, is his being able to wrest her secret from
her. Letting her become momentarily deranged, and so betray it in that way,
would not help. The colliding forces hold their own so evenly that action
becomes impossible for the tragic individual. Her pain is now increased by her
love, by her sympathetic suffering with the one she loves. Only in death can she
find peace; thus her whole life is consecrated to sorrow, and it is as though she
had set a limit, a dike against the woe that might perhaps have fatally transmitted
itself to a succeeding generation. Only in her moment of death can she admit the
intensity of her love; she can only admit that she belongs to him at that instant
when she does not belong to him. When Epaminondas was wounded in the battle
of Mantinea, he left the arrow in the wound until he heard the battle was won,
because he knew that the moment it was drawn out he would die. Thus our
Antigone bears her secret in her heart like an arrow which life has driven
constantly in, deeper and deeper, without depriving her of life, for as long as it
remains in her heart she can live. But the moment it is drawn out she must die.
Wresting her secret from her is what her lover must constantly strive for, yet this
means her certain death. By whose hand, then, does she fall? That of the living
or the dead? In a sense of the dead, for what was prophesied of Hercules, that he
would not be slain by someone living but by someone dead,
28
is true also of her,
in so far as the cause of her death is the memory of her father; in another sense it
is by the hand of the living, in so far as her unhappy love provides the occasion
for that memory to put her to death.
4 SHADOWGRAPHS
Psychological Entertainment
Read before
Symparanekromenoi
Love may always breach its oath;
Love’s spell in this cave does lull
The drunken, startled soul
Into forgetting it pledged its troth.
*
Yesterday I loved,
Today I suffer,
Tomorrow I die.
Yet fain would I think
Today and tomorrow,
Of yesterday.
1
IMPROVISED ADDRESS
We celebrate, in this hour, the founding of our Society. We rejoice once more
at the recurrence of the happy event of the longest day’s passing and the
commencement of the victory of night. This long, livelong day we have waited;
even a moment ago we were sighing at its length, but now our despair is turned
to joy. True, the victory is but trifling and the day will remain in the ascendant
yet a while, but the fact that its dominion has been broken does not escape us. So
we do not put off our celebrations until night’s victory can be seen by all, do not
wait until the sluggish bourgeois life reminds us that the day is waning. No, as a
young bride impatiently awaits nightfall, we longingly await the first onset of
night, the first announcement of its coming victory, and the nearer we approach
despair at what to do should the days not shorten, the greater our joy and
surprise.
A year has passed and our Society is still in being. Shall we rejoice at this fact,
dear Symparanekromenoi, rejoice that its survival mocks our teaching that
everything must end? Or should we not rather sorrow over the fact that it is still
there, and be glad that in any case it has just one more year to go, seeing we
decided to dissolve it if it had not vanished of itself before then? – In founding it
we have formed no far-reaching plans, for knowing life’s misery and the perfidy
of existence we are resolved to lend the law of the world a hand and destroy
ourselves if it does not get there first. A year has passed and our numbers are still
complete, no vacancies have occurred. And none has been made; we are each of
us too proud for that, for we all look upon death as the greatest good fortune.
Should we rejoice over this and not rather sorrow, and be glad only in the hope
that life’s tumult will soon separate us, that life’s storm will soon snatch us
away? Thoughts like these are indeed better suited to our Society, accord best
with the moment’s celebration, with the whole setting. For is it not a stroke of
genius and a matter of significance that the floor of this little room, according to
the custom of the land, should be strewn with green as though for a funeral, and
does not the nature that surrounds us itself lend its approval if we heed the wild
storm raging around us, the mighty voice of the wind? Yes, let us be silent for a
moment and listen to the music of the storm, its sturdy course, its bold challenge,
the defiant roaring of the ocean, and the anguished sighing of the forest, the
despairing creaking of the trees, and the faint-hearted rustling of the grass. It is
true men say the divine voice is not in the rushing wind but in the gentle breeze,
2
but our ears are not made to pick up gentle breezes, only to gulp in the din of the
elements. And why does it not break forth in still greater violence, making an
end of life and the world and this brief speech, which at least has the supreme
advantage that it is soon ended! Yes, let that vortex which is the innermost
principle of the world, even though people are not aware of it but busily eat and
drink and marry and propagate without a heed, let it break forth and in its
resentment shrug off the mountains and the nations and the cultural
achievements and clever inventions of man, let it break forth with the last
terrible shriek, which more surely than the last trump proclaims the overthrow of
everything, let it move and whirl away this naked cliff on which we stand, as
easily as fluff before the breath of our nostrils.
3 – And yet night is winning and
the day is shortening and hope is growing! So fill your cups once more, dear
drinking companions; with this goblet I toast you, the eternal mother of all
things, silent night!
4 From you all things come, to you they all return. Then take
pity once more upon the world, open yourself again to gather everything in and
protect us all safely in your womb! I toast you, dark night, I toast you as victor,
and this is my solace, for you make everything shorter, the day, time, life, and
memory’s tribulation, in eternal oblivion!
Ever since Lessing, in his famous essay Laocoön, resolved the boundary
disputes between poetry and art,
5 we may take it that the upshot unanimously
accepted by all aestheticians is that the difference lies in the fact that art belongs
in the category of space and poetry in that of time, that art represents repose,
poetry movement. Whatever, then, is to be an object of artistic representation
must have that quiet transparency in which the inner reposes in a corresponding
outer. The less this is the case, the more difficult the artist’s task becomes, until
finally the difference becomes insistent and tells him that the task just isn’t his. If
we apply the distinction, not propounded here but only loosely acknowledged, to
the relation between sorrow and joy, it is easy to see that joy is far easier to
represent in art than sorrow. That does not at all mean that art cannot represent
sorrow, but only that there comes a point at which the essential thing is to posit
an opposition between inner and outer, which makes its representation
impossible for art. This stems in turn from the very nature of sorrow. It is of the
essence of joy to reveal itself, but sorrow wants to hide, yes, sometimes even to
deceive. Joy is communicative, sociable, open-hearted, and wants to express
itself; sorrow is reserved, silent, solitary, and seeks to retire into itself. Surely not
even life’s most casual observer will deny that this is correct. There are those so
constituted that under affect their blood rushes to the skin, making the inner
movement outwardly visible. Others are so constituted that the blood flows
inwards, seeking the ventricles of the heart and the inner parts of the organism.
Something of the same difference is to be found in the ways joy and sorrow
express themselves. The first type of constitution described is much easier to
observe than the second. In the first you see the expression, the inner movement
is outwardly visible; in the second the inner movement is intimated. It is as
though the outward pallor were the inner’s leave-taking, and thought and
imagination hasten after the fugitive in its secret hiding-place. This is especially
true of the kind of sorrow I shall now consider, what may be termed reflective
sorrow. Here the outer contains at most only a hint that puts you on the track,
sometimes not even that much. This sorrow cannot be represented in art; since
the equilibrium between inner and outer has been revoked, it does not lend itself
to spatial specifications. In another respect, too, it is not susceptible of
representation in art, since it lacks that inner repose and is constantly in
movement. This movement, though it gives no richer content, is nevertheless the
essential thing. Like a squirrel in its cage it goes round in itself, though not so
uniformly as that animal but constantly varying the combinations of sorrow’s
inner elements. What prevents reflective grief from being represented in art is
that it lacks repose, that it fails to come into accord with itself, does not come to
rest in any single definite expression. As the sick person throws himself from
one side to the other in pain, so does reflective sorrow toss about, looking for its
object and its expression. When sorrow finds repose, then its interior also
gradually works its way outwards, becomes visible in the exterior, and so
becomes an object of representation for art. If sorrow has calm and composure, it
invariably begins its movement from inside outwards; reflective sorrow moves
inwards, like the blood that runs away from the surface, giving only a hint of its
presence through a sudden pallor. Reflective sorrow brings with it no
characteristic outward change; from its very first moment it hastens inwards and
only a reasonably careful observer suspects its vanishing; afterwards it takes
great care that the exterior obtrude as little as possible.
Seeking its way thus inwards, it finds at last an enclosure, an innermost recess,
where it thinks it can stay,
6 and now it begins its monotonous movement. Like
the pendulum in a clock it swings back and forth and cannot find rest. It begins
always at the beginning and ponders anew, interrogates the witnesses, collates
and tests their various statements, as it has already done a hundred times, yet it is
never finished. In the course of time monotony has a somewhat numbing effect.
As the monotonous drip from a roof, the steady whirl of a spinning-wheel, the
monotonous sound of the measured paces of someone walking up and down on
the floor above all make us numb, so in the end reflective sorrow finds relief in
this movement, which becomes a necessity for it in the form of an illusion of
motion. Finally a certain equilibrium emerges. The need for sorrow to break
through, to whatever extent it may on occasion have expressed itself, ceases to
exist; the exterior is calm and composed, and deep inside, in its little nook,
sorrow lives like a well-guarded prisoner in an underground gaol, where it
spends year after year in its monotonous movement, walking back and forth in
its by-chamber, never wearying of putting sorrow’s long or short road behind it.
What gives rise to reflective sorrow can lie partly in the individual’s own
subjective nature, partly in the objective sorrow itself or its occasion. A
pathologically reflective individual will transmute every sorrow into a reflective
sorrow, his individual structure and organization make it impossible for him to
assimilate the sorrow without further ado. This, however, is a morbid condition
of no particular interest, since any accidental happening can undergo a
metamorphosis in this way and so become a reflective sorrow. Such is always
the case when the objective sorrow has not been dealt with, where it leaves a
doubt behind, whatever its nature otherwise. A great multiplicity is immediately
offered to thought, the more in proportion to how much one has lived and
experienced, or is disposed to employ one’s powers of discernment in such
experiments. I have no intention, however, of working through all this diversity;
I shall bring out just one single aspect as this has revealed itself to my
observation.
When the occasion for the sorrow is a case of deception, then the nature of the
objective sorrow is such as to beget reflective sorrow in the individual. That a
deception really is such is often very hard to ascertain, and yet everything
depends on this; as long as it remains disputable, sorrow will find no rest but
must continue wandering back and forth in reflection. Moreover, when this
deception touches, not something external, but a person’s whole inner life, the
innermost core of his life, then the probability of the reflective sorrow’s
persisting becomes greater and greater. But what, indeed, can with greater truth
be called a woman’s life than her love? So when the sorrow of an unhappy love
is rooted in a deception, we have unreservedly a case of reflective sorrow,
whether this persists for a lifetime or she overcomes it. Unhappy love is certainly
of itself the most profound of sorrows for a woman; but it does not follow that
every unhappy love generates a reflective sorrow. Thus when the loved one dies
or perhaps she simply finds her love is unrequited, or life’s circumstances make
it impossible to realize her wish, certainly there is an occasion for sorrow but not
for reflective sorrow, unless the individual is already sick, in which case she falls
outside the scope of our interest. If, on the other hand, she is not sick, her sorrow
will be an immediate sorrow and as such also able to become an object of
representation in art, whereas on the contrary, it will be quite impossible for art
to express and represent reflective sorrow or the point of it. For immediate
sorrow is that immediate copy and expression of the sorrow’s impression which
is entirely congruent with the original, just like the image Veronica kept on her
handkerchief; and sorrow’s sacred script is stamped in the external, beautiful and
clear, and legible by all.
7
Reflective sorrow cannot, therefore, be an object of representation in art, partly
because it never subsists but is always in the process of becoming, partly
because it is unconcerned with and indifferent to the external, the visible. So
unless art is to limit itself to the naivety one finds examples of in old books,
where a figure is depicted which can represent just about anything while on its
breast one discovers a piece of armour in the form of a heart, or some such, on
which one can read all about it, especially if the figure by its posture draws
attention to itself, or even simply points to it – an effect the artist could just as
well have produced by writing ‘Please note’ above the picture – he will have to
give up the idea of representation in this area, leaving it to poets and
psychologists.
It is this reflective sorrow I now propose to draw out and render visible, so far
as that is possible, in some pictures. I call them ‘shadowgraphs’, partly to remind
the reader by the very designation that I am summoning them from the dark side
of life, partly because, just like shadowgraphs, they are not visible straightaway.
If I take a shadowgraph in my hand, I gain no impression from it, can form no
real idea of it; it is only when I hold it up to the wall and look not at the
immediate image but at what appears on the wall, it is only then that I see it.
Similarly the picture I want to show here is an inner picture which can also only
be detected by looking through the exterior. There may be nothing striking about
the exterior, it is only when I look through it that I discover the inner picture,
which is what I want to show, an inner picture too refined to be visible on the
outside, woven as it is of the softest moods of the soul. If I look at a sheet of
paper, to outward observation there may be nothing remarkable about it; it is
only when I hold it up to the light of day and see through it that I discover the
delicate inner picture which is as though too insubstantial to be seen
immediately.
So fasten your gaze, dear Symparanekromenoi, upon this inner picture, do not
let yourselves be distracted by the exterior, or rather, do not introduce it
yourselves, for I shall constantly draw it aside in order the better to view the
interior. But that, surely, is something for which this Society, of which I have the
honour to be a member, needs no encouragement; for although fairly young, we
are all still old enough not to let the outer deceive us or be satisfied with that.
Would I be flattering myself with a vain hope, then, were I to believe that you
would grant these pictures your attention? Or must these efforts of mine be alien
and indifferent to you, not in harmony with the interests of our association, a
fellowship that knows but one passion, namely sympathy with sorrow’s secret?
We, too, form an order; we, too, sally forth now and then into the world like
knights errant, each along his own path, although not to fight monsters or to
come to the aid of innocence or be tried in adventures of love. None of that
occupies us, not even the latter, for the arrow in a woman’s glance cannot hurt
our hardened breast, and it is not the merry smile of happy maidens that moves
us, but the secret beckoning of sorrow. Let others be proud that no girl near or
far can withstand the power of their love, we do not envy them; we would be
proud if no secret sorrow escaped our attention, no private sorrow were too coy
and too proud for us to succeed in probing triumphantly into its innermost
hiding-places!
What is the most hazardous conflict, what presupposes the most skill and
provides the greatest enjoyment, into that we will not inquire; our choice is
made, we love only sorrow, it is sorrow alone we seek out and wherever we find
its footprints we follow them, undaunted, unwavering, until it stands revealed.
For this battle we arm ourselves, we train ourselves in it every day. And it is true
that sorrow steals through the world so very secretively that only someone with
sympathy for it succeeds in getting a whiff of it. You walk down the street, one
house looks like the other, and only the experienced observer suspects that in
that house, at midnight, everything looks quite different: an unhappy person
wanders about, unable to rest; he climbs the stairs, nis steps echo in the stillness
of the night. We pass one another in the street, the one person looks like the
other, and the other just like anyone else, and only the experienced observer
suspects that, in that head, there lives a lodger who has nothing to do with the
world, but lives out his lonely life confined to quiet domesticity. So the outer is
the object of our observation, but not of our interest. Thus the fisherman sits and
directs his attention unwaveringly on the float, yet the float does not interest him
at all, only the movements down on the sea-bed. So the outer does indeed have
significance for us, yet not as an expression of the inner but like a telegram
telling of something hidden deep within. When you look long and attentively at a
face, you sometimes discover that it is as if there were another face within the
one you see. This is in general an unmistakable sign that the soul conceals an
emigrant who has withdrawn from the outside world to watch over a hidden
treasure, and the direction observation must take is intimated by the way one
face lies as though inside the other, from which one understands that in order to
discover anything one must try to probe inwards. The face, which is ordinarily
the mirror of the soul, assumes here an ambiguity which cannot be represented in
art, and which usually only lasts for a fleeting moment. It needs a special eye to
see it, a special glance to pursue this infallible index of a secret sorrow. This
glance is a covetous one and yet so painstaking, disturbing and compelling, yet
so sympathetic, persistent and subtle, yet so frank and benevolent; it lulls the
individual into a certain pleasant languor in which he finds a sensual rapture in
gushing out his sorrow, just like the rapture enjoyed in bleeding to death. The
present is forgotten, the outer is penetrated, the past resurrected, sorrow’s
breathing is made easy. The sorrowing person finds relief, and sorrow’s
sympathetic knight rejoices at having found what he was seeking. We seek not
the present but the past, not joy, for that is always present, but sorrow, because
its nature is to pass by, and in the instant of the present one sees it only as one
sees a person of whom one just catches sight the moment he turns the corner and
disappears.
But sometimes sorrow is even better at concealing itself, and the outer gives us
not the least hint of anything. For long it can escape our attention, but when it
happens that a look, a word, a sigh, a tone of voice, a twitch of the eye, a
trembling of the lips, a fumbled handclasp, treacherously betrays what was
painstakingly hidden, then passion is aroused, then the contest begins. Now we
have need of vigilance and tenacity and cunning; for what after all is as inventive
as private sorrow – a prisoner for life in solitary confinement also has ample
time to think up a great deal; and what so quick to hide itself as private sorrow,
for no young girl can cover a bared bosom in greater alarm and haste than
hidden sorrow when taken by surprise. Unflinching fearlessness is called for in
this conflict, then, for one struggles with a Proteus,
8 but if only one holds out it
has to give up. Like that old man of the sea, whatever shape it puts on to slip
free, twining itself like a serpent around us, terrifying us like a lion with its roar,
turning itself into a tree with the wind howling in its leaves, or a foaming lake, or
a crackling fire, in the end he still has to prophesy, and the sorrow must finally
be revealed.
Behold, these adventures are our pleasure, our pastime, testing ourselves in
them is our chivalry. For their sake we get up like thieves in the night, for their
sake we risk everything, for no passion is as savage as that of sympathy. Nor
need any shortage of adventures be our fear, only that we may encounter
opposition that is too hard and unyielding; for as naturalists tell that by blasting
huge rocks that have defied the centuries, they have found deep inside a living
animal which has supported life undetected, so it should be possible for there to
be humans with exteriors as firm as a rock who have safeguarded an eternally
hidden life of sorrow. Yet this shall not quench our passion or cool our ardour.
Quite the contrary, it will inflame it, for our passion is not indeed curiosity,
content with the external and the superficial, but a sympathetic dread which
searches hearts and hidden thoughts, evokes through magic and incantation what
is secret, even what death has withheld from our gaze. It is said that Saul came in
disguise to a witch before the battle,
9 and demanded that she show him the image
of Samuel. Surely it was not mere curiosity that drove him, not simply a desire
to see Samuel’s visible image; it was his thoughts he wanted to learn, and no
doubt he waited anxiously until he heard the stern judge’s verdict. Neither, then,
will it be mere curiosity, dear Symparanekromenoi, that moves one or another of
you to contemplate the images I shall now present to you. For although I have
indicated them by certain poetic names, this in no way suggests that it is these
poetic figures alone presenting themselves before you. The names must be
regarded as common nouns, and I for my part shall not object should one or
other of you feel inclined to call the particular picture by another name, a dearer
name, or some name that perhaps comes more naturally to you.
1. Marie Beaumarchais
We make this girl’s acquaintance in Goethe’s Clavigo, which we shall keep to
except that we shall accompany her a little further forward in time, to where she
has lost her dramatic interest and sorrow’s retinue is gradually thinning out. We,
however, continue to accompany her; for we knights of sympathy have as much
the native gift as the acquired art of keeping pace with sorrow in its progress.
Her story is brief: Clavigo was betrothed to her, Clavigo left her. This
information suffices for the person who is used to observing life’s phenomena as
one inspects curiosities in an art cabinet; the shorter the better for the more one
can see. One can similarly relate, quite briefly, that Tantalus thirsts and that
Sisyphus rolls a stone up a mountain.
10
If one is in a hurry it would only delay
matters to dwell further on these things, since one can learn no more than one
already knows, which is the whole story. Whatever claims more attention has to
be something quite different. One gathers round the tea-table in a familiar
cluster, the samovar sings its final refrain, the lady of the house begs the
mysterious stranger unburden his heart, to which end she has sugared water and
jam brought in, and now he begins: it is a long and complicated story. That’s
how it goes in novels, and that too is something quite different: a long-drawn-out
story with such a short little advertisement. Whether it is a short story for Marie
Beaumarchais is another matter; so much is certain, it is not long drawn out, for
a long story has after all a measurable length; on the other hand, a short story
sometimes has the puzzling property of being longer than the most long-drawnout one.
In the foregoing I have already remarked that reflective sorrow is not visible in
the exterior, that is, does not find its peaceful, beautiful expression there. The
inner unrest does not allow this transparency, rather the exterior is consumed by
it; to the extent that the inner does proclaim itself in the outer, that would be a
morbidity which can never be an object of representation in art, for then it lacks
the interest of beauty. Goethe has given us a few hints about this. But even if one
were agreed on the correctness of this observation, one might still be tempted to
consider it something accidental; it is only when one is convinced by purely
poetic and aesthetic considerations that what observation teaches is aesthetically
true, only then does one acquire the deeper awareness. Suppose I imagine a
reflective sorrow and ask whether it might not be represented in art; immediately
it would be evident that in relation to it the exterior is entirely accidental. But in
that case the idea of artistic beauty has been abandoned. Whether the subject is
large or small, significant or insignificant, beautiful or not so beautiful, none of
that matters; to consider whether it would be more correct to let her head incline
to one side or to the other or towards the ground, to have her stare in melancholy
or fix her gaze sadly upon the ground, all such things are entirely irrelevant – the
one is no more adequate at expressing reflective sorrow than the other.
Compared with the internal, the external becomes insignificant and of no
consequence. The point in reflective sorrow is that the sorrow is constantly in
search of its object; the searching is the unrest of sorrow and its life. But this
searching is a constant fluctuation, and if the outer were at every moment a
perfect expression of the inner, to represent reflective sorrow would require an
entire series of pictures and no one picture would acquire genuine artistic value,
since it would not be beautiful but true. We would have to look at the pictures as
we do at the second hand of a watch; the works themselves are invisible, but the
inner movement constantly expresses itself in the constant change in the outer.
But this change cannot be represented in art, yet it is the whole point. Thus when
unhappy love has its ground in a deception the pain and suffering are this: that
the sorrow cannot find its object. If the deception is proved and if the victim
perceives that it is a deception, the sorrow does not cease but it becomes an
immediate sorrow, not a reflective one. The dialectical difficulty is easy to see,
for what does she sorrow for? If he was a deceiver, it was just as well he left her,
the sooner the better; she should be glad indeed and sorrow only at the fact that
she loved him; and yet it is a profound sorrow that he was a deceiver. But this
question of whether it is indeed a deception, that is the unrest in sorrow’s
perpetuum mobile. To establish with certainty the external fact that a deception is
a deception is itself very hard, but even that would by no means settle the matter
or bring the movement to a standstill. For love, deception is an absolute paradox,
and in this lies the necessity for reflective sorrow. The various factors in love
could be put together in the individual in very different ways, so that love in the
one will not be as in the other. Egoism may be the dominant factor, or sympathy.
But however the love may be, in its elements as much as its constitution, a
deception is a paradox it cannot think and which it nevertheless wants, in the
end, to think. Yes, if either the egoism or the sympathy were present absolutely,
the paradox would be removed; that is, the individual is, on the strength of the
absolute, beyond reflection, does not think the paradox in the sense of abolishing
it through a ‘how’ of reflection, but is saved precisely by not thinking it; he does
not trouble with the busy deliverances or confusions of reflection, but rests in
himself. Egoistically proud love, because of its pride, considers deception
impossible; it does not bother to find out what might be said for or against, how
the party in question can be defended or exonerated; it is absolutely sure,
because it is too proud to believe that anyone should dare to deceive it.
Sympathetic love possesses the faith that can move mountains; for it, every
defence is nothing compared with its unshakeable certainty that there was no
deception; every accusation proves nothing against the witness who testifies that
there was no deception, testifies to it not in this way or that but absolutely. Yet
seldom in life does one see such a love, or perhaps never. Generally love
contains both factors, and this puts it in relation to the paradox. In the two cases
described, the paradox is no doubt also there for love but does not occupy it; in
this latter case the paradox is there before it. The paradox is unthinkable and
love nevertheless wants to think it, and according to the different factors as they
momentarily come to the fore, it comes near, and often in a contradictory
manner, to thinking it, but does not succeed. This line of thought is infinite and
ends only when the individual voluntarily breaks it off by bringing something
else into the picture, a volitional factor, but in that case the individual comes
within ethical categories and does not concern us aesthetically. It is by a decision
that he reaches what he cannot reach by way of reflection, namely rest.
This is true of every unhappy love based on a deception. What must evoke
reflective sorrow even more in Marie Beaumarchais is the fact that it is only an
engagement that has been broken off. An engagement is a possibility, not
something actual, yet just because it is only a possibility, it might seem that the
effect of its being broken off would be less, that it is much easier for the
individual to withstand this blow. And sometimes that may well be true. On the
other hand, the fact that it is only a possibility that is destroyed tempts reflection
much more to the fore. When something actual is brought to an end, generally
the break is far more radical, every nerve is cut asunder and in itself the fracture,
regarded as such, remains complete. When a possibility is broken off, the
instantaneous pain may not be as great, but then it often leaves one or another
small ligament whole and unharmed, which becomes a constant source of
continued suffering. The destroyed possibility appears transfigured in a higher
possibility; while the temptation to conjure up such a new possibility is less
when it is something actual that is broken off, because actuality is higher than
possibility.
So Clavigo has abandoned her; he has faithlessly broken the tie. Used to
depending on him, when he rejects her she hasn’t the strength to stand, she sinks
helplessly into the arms of the environment. That is how it seems to have been
with Marie. One could imagine another beginning; one could imagine that from
the very first she had the strength to turn her sorrow into a reflective form; that
either to escape the humiliation of hearing others talk of her being deceived, or
because she still cared so much for him that it would pain her to hear him
constantly reviled as a deceiver, she straightaway broke off every connection
with others in order to consume her sorrow in her self and herself in her sorrow.
We follow Goethe. Those around her are not unsympathetic, they feel her pain
with her, and in doing so say it will be the death of her. Now, aesthetically, that is
quite right. The nature of unhappy love can be such that suicide is to be
considered aesthetically correct, but in that case it must not be based on
deception, for then a suicide loses all nobility and implies an admission which
pride must refuse to make. On the other hand, if it is indeed the death of her, this
amounts to his having murdered her. That expression is in total harmony with the
strength of the emotion within her and the idea gives her relief. But it is not often
that life adheres closely to aesthetic categories, it does not always obey an
aesthetic imperative, and she does not die. This causes those around her
embarrassment. They feel that it won’t do to keep on repeating the assurance that
she is dying when she continues to live; besides, they find themselves unable to
proclaim it with the same energetic pathos as at the start; and yet this was the
condition on which she was to receive any comfort. So they change their
method. He was, they say, a blackguard, a trickster, a detestable person not worth
taking one’s own life for; forget him, think no more of the matter, it was just an
engagement, erase this incident from your memory; you are still young, can still
hope. They set her aflame, for this pathos of wrath harmonizes with other moods
within her; her pride feeds on the vindictive thought of making nothing of it all;
it was not because he was exceptional that she loved him, far from it; she could
see his faults very well, but believed him to be a good person, a faithful person,
that’s why she loved him, it was from pity, and so it will be easy to forget him
because she has never actually needed him. The environment and Marie are in
unison again and the duet between them proceeds excellently.
For those around her it is not hard to think of Clavigo as a deceiver, for they
have never loved him and so it is no paradox; and if there was any fondness for
him (something Goethe suggests in connection with the sister), just this interest
arms them against him, and this good will, which may have been something
more than good will, becomes an excellent incendiary for feeding the flames of
hate. Nor does her circle find it hard to erase its memory of him, so it demands
that Marie do the same. Her pride breaks out in hatred, the circle adds fuel to the
fire, she gives vent to her feelings in strong words and forthright declarations of
intent with which she intoxicates herself. Those around her rejoice. They fail to
notice, what she will hardly admit to herself, that in the next instant she is weak
and faint; they fail to notice the anxious suspicion taking hold of her that the
energy she now and then has is an illusion. She assiduously conceals this and
admits it to no one. The circle goes on happily with its theoretical exercises, but
nevertheless begins to demand evidence of practical results. This fails to appear.
Her circle continues to incite her, since her words reveal inner strength, and yet
they harbour a suspicion that all is not well. They become impatient, they risk
extreme measures, they drive the spurs of ridicule into her flank to spur her on.
Too late, the misunderstanding has taken effect. It is no humiliation for those
around her that he really deceived Marie, but it is for her. The revenge offered,
however, to despise him has little meaning; for he does not love her, and her
scorn becomes a bank draft that no one honours. On the other hand, although for
the circle there is nothing painful in Clavigo’s being a deceiver, there is for
Marie; and yet he does not altogether want for an advocate in her heart. She feels
she has gone too far, she has given hint of a strength she does not possess. That
is not something she will admit to. And what consolation is there in contempt? It
is better, then, to sorrow. Besides, perhaps there is some secret note or other in
her possession, of great significance for interpreting the text, but also such that it
can present him, according to circumstances, in a better or worse light. But she
has let no one in on this, nor will she; for if he wasn’t a deceiver he might
conceivably rue the step and turn back, or perhaps – what would be even more
glorious – have no need to rue it. He might justify himself absolutely or explain
everything, and then it could be a hindrance were she to make use of it; the old
relationship could no longer be evoked, and that would be her own fault, for it
would have been she who had made others privy to the most secret growth of his
love. Were she really able to convince herself that he was a deceiver, yes, then it
would make no difference anyway, and in any case the nicest thing for her to do
would be not to make use of it.
The environment has thus been her unwilling assistant in developing a new
passion, jealousy over her own sorrow. Her decision is made. On every side the
environment lacks the energy to harmonize with her passion; she takes the veil.
She does not enter a convent, but she takes the veil of sorrow which hides her
from every alien glance. Outwardly she is calm, all is forgotten, her conversation
betrays no hint; she takes the vow of sorrow and now begins her solitary, secret
life. At that moment everything is changed; before, it seemed at least she could
talk to others, but now not only is she bound by the vow of silence wrung from
her by her pride with love’s connivance, or demanded by her love and assented
to by her pride, she simply doesn’t know where to begin, or how, and not
because new factors have appeared, but because reflection has triumphed. If
someone were now to ask her what it was she sorrowed over, she could give no
answer, or she would answer in the same way as that wise man
11 who, when
asked what religion was, kept on demanding time to think it over and so was
perpetually at a loss for an answer. Now she is lost to the world, lost to her
surroundings, immured alive; it is with sadness she covers the last opening, for
even then she feels it might be possible to reveal herself; the next moment she is
removed from them for ever. Yet it is decided, irrevocably decided, and she need
have no fear that, as with anyone else walled in alive, once the meagre portion of
bread and water provided for her is used up she shall perish, for she has
nourishment for a long time; she need have no fear of boredom, she can keep
herself busy. Her exterior is calm and peaceful, there is nothing unusual about it,
and yet her heart is not the incorruptible being of a quiet spirit,
12 but a restless
spirit’s fruitless occupation. She seeks solitude or its opposite. In solitude she
rests from the effort it always costs to force one’s outward appearance into a
definite form. In the way someone who has been standing or sitting in a forced
position stretches his body with pleasure, as a branch long bowed under pressure
joyfully regains its normal position when what binds it is broken, so she too
finds her recreation. Or she seeks the opposite – noise, distraction – so that while
everyone’s attention is directed elsewhere, she can be safely occupied with
herself; and what goes on nearest her, the sound of music, the noisy
conversation, sound so far away that it is as if she were sitting in a little room by
herself, removed from all the world. And if perchance she cannot force back the
tears, she is certain to be misunderstood, maybe she is just having a good cry; for
when one lives in an ecclesia pressa,
13
it is a real joy when one’s way of
expressing one’s worship coincides with the public way of doing so. Only the
quieter forms of contact make her anxious, for here she is less unguarded, here it
is so easy to make a mistake, so hard to prevent its being noticed.
So outwardly there is nothing to remark, but inside there is ceaseless activity.
Here there is an examination which one might quite justly and with special
emphasis call interrogation under torture; everything is brought out and carefully
examined: his form, his appearance, his voice, his words. In interrogations of
this kind it sometimes happens that a judge, captivated by the beauty of the
accused, has broken off the examination and found himself unable to carry on.
The court expectantly awaits the results of his investigation, but they fail to
materialize, and yet not at all because the judge is in neglect of his duties; the
gaoler can testify that he comes every night, that the accused is brought before
him, that the examination lasts several hours, that in his experience no judge has
ever kept going like this. And so the court concludes that it must be a very
complicated case. Thus it goes with Marie, not once but again and again.
Everything is presented as it occurred, faithfully, justice demands that – and
love. The accused is summoned. ‘There he comes, he turns the corner, he opens
the wicket gate, look how he hastens, he has longed for me, it’s as though he
threw everything aside so as to come to me as soon as possible, I hear his swift
steps, swifter than my own heartbeat, he comes, there he is’ – and the
interrogation – it is postponed.
‘Good Lord, this little phrase! I have so often repeated it to myself, recalled it
in the midst of much else, but never before have I noticed what really lies
concealed in it. Yes, it explains everything; he is not serious about leaving me,
he is coming back. What is the whole world to this little phrase? People wearied
of me, I had no friend, but now I have a friend, a confidant, a little phrase that
explains everything – he is coming back, his eye is not downcast, he looks at me
half reproachfully and says, “You of little faith”, and this little phrase hovers like
an olive leaf upon his lips – there he is’ – and the interrogation is postponed.
In circumstances like these it is natural enough that giving a verdict should be
attended with great difficulty. Obviously a young girl is not a jurist, but it by no
means follows that she cannot pass judgement, and yet this girl’s verdict will
always be such that, while at first glance looking like a verdict, it contains
something else that shows it is no verdict, and which also shows that the next
moment a quite opposite verdict can be given. ‘He was no deceiver, for to be that
he must have been aware of it from the beginning; but he wasn’t, my heart tells
me he loved me.’ If one raises the requirements of deception in this way, perhaps
in the final analysis no deceiver has ever lived. To acquit him on that ground
shows a partiality for the accused which is not consistent with strict justice, nor
does it stand up to a single objection. ‘He was a deceiver, an abhorrent creature
who has callously and heartlessly made me boundlessly unhappy. I was content
before I knew him. Yes, it’s true, I had no idea I could be so happy, or that there
was such a wealth of joy as he taught me; but nor did I have any idea I could
become as unhappy as I am now, and this too he has taught me. Therefore I will
hate him, abhor him, curse him. Yes, I curse you, Clavigo, in the inmost depths
of my soul I curse you. But no one must know this, I cannot allow anyone else to
do the same, for no one but myself has the right to do so. I have loved you as no
one else has, but I hate you too, for no one knows your cunning as I do. Ye good
gods to whom vengeance belongs, grant me it just a while! I shall not misuse it, I
shall not be cruel. I shall then creep into his soul when he wants to love another,
not to kill that love, that would be no punishment, as well I know, for he loves
her as little as he loved me; he simply does not love people, he loves only the
idea, the thought, his mighty influence at court, his intellectual power, none of
which I can understand how he can love. I take these away from him, then he
will learn to know my pain. And when he is near to despair I will give it all back
to him, but it is me he shall thank for it – and then I am avenged.
‘No, he was no deceiver. He loved me no more and so left me, but that was no
deceit. If he had stayed without loving me, then he would have been a deceiver,
then I would have lived like a pensioner on the love he once had for me, lived on
his compassion, on the mite he might have thrown to me, though generously,
lived as a burden on him and as a torment to myself. Cowardly, wretched heart,
despise yourself, learn to be great; learn it from him; he has loved me better than
I have known how to love myself. And should I be angry with him? No, I shall
continue to love him, because his love was stronger, his thought prouder than my
weakness and my cowardice. And perhaps he loves me still, yes, it was out of
love for me that he left me.
‘Yes, now I see the truth, I am no longer in doubt, he was a deceiver. I saw
him, his look was proud and triumphant, he looked down upon me with his
scornful glance. At his side walked a Spanish girl, radiantly beautiful; why was
she so beautiful? – I could murder her – why am I not as beautiful? And was I
not? I didn’t know it, but he taught me that I was, and why am I no longer? Who
is to blame? A curse upon you, Clavigo! If you had stayed with me I would have
become even more beautiful, for with your words and your assurances my love
grew, and with it my beauty. Now I am faded, I thrive no more, what power has
all the world’s tenderness compared with a word from you? Oh, that I were
beautiful again! Would that I could be pleasing to him again, for that is the only
reason I want to be beautiful. Oh, think if he could no longer love youth and
beauty; then I would grieve more than before, and who can grieve as I?
‘Yes, he was a deceiver. How else could he have stopped loving me? Have I
stopped loving him? Is it not the same law for a man’s love as for a woman’s? Or
should a man be weaker than the weak? Or has he perhaps made a mistake,
perhaps it was an illusion that he loved me, an illusion that vanished like a
dream; does this befit a man? Or was it an instability, is it proper for a man to be
unstable? And why did he assure me in the beginning, then, that he loved me so
much? If love has no endurance, what then can endure? Yes, Clavigo, you have
taken everything from me, my faith, my faith in love, not just in yours!
‘He was no deceiver. What it was that snatched him away, I do not know. I am
not familiar with this dark power; but it pained him, pained him deeply; he did
not want to share it with me, so he made himself out to be a deceiver. Yes, if he
had taken up with another girl, I would say he was a deceiver and no power in
the world would make me believe otherwise; but he has not done that. Perhaps
he thinks that by adopting the appearance of a deceiver he can lessen my pain,
arm me against him. That’s why he shows himself now and then with young
girls, that’s why he looked so scornfully at me the other day, in order to make me
angry and so set me free. No, he was certainly no deceiver, and how would that
voice be capable of deception? It was so calm, yet full of feeling; as if clearing a
path through solid rock, that’s how it sounded from an interior whose depth I
scarcely managed to suspect. Can this voice deceive? What, then, is the voice, is
it a movement of the tongue, a noise one can produce at pleasure? Somewhere in
the soul it must have a home, it has to have a birthplace. And that it has, it had its
home in his inmost heart. There he loved me, there he loves me. True, he had
another voice too, one that was cold, icy, it could kill every joy in my soul, stifle
every joyful thought, could even make my kiss cold and disgusting to myself.
Which was the true one? He could deceive in every way, but this vibrant voice in
which all his passion trembles, this I feel was no deception, it is impossible. The
other was a deception, or evil powers took control of him. No, he was no
deceiver – that voice which has bound me to him for ever, that is not a deception.
A deceiver he was not, even if I never understood him.’
She is never finished with the interrogation, nor with the verdict. Not with the
interrogation, because it keeps on being interrupted; not with the verdict,
because it is only a mood. So once begun, this movement can continue as long as
it will, and no end is in sight. Only a breach can bring it to a close, that is,
breaking off the whole line of thought; but this cannot happen, because the will
is always in the service of reflection, which gives the momentary passion energy.
When she tries at times to break away from it all, to make nothing of it, this is
again only a mood, a momentary passion, and reflection remains constantly the
victor. There can be no mediation.
14
If she sets off in such a way that the
beginning is in one way or another the result of processes of reflection, she is
immediately carried away. The will has to be wholly indifferent, to begin on the
strength of its own willing; only then can there be any question of a beginning. If
that happens, she may indeed begin, but this falls altogether outside our field of
interest; we can then hand her over with pleasure to the moralists or whoever
else would take care of her; we wish her an honourable marriage and promise to
dance on her wedding-day, where the change of name will also conveniently let
us forget that it was the Marie Beaumarchais we have been speaking of.
We return nevertheless to Marie Beaumarchais. The peculiarity of her sorrow,
as we noted above, is the restlessness that prevents her finding the object of
sorrow. Her pain cannot find calm, she lacks the peace necessary for a life that
can assimilate its nourishment and be refreshed by it; no illusion overshadows
her with its quiet coolness while she absorbs the pain. She lost childhood’s
illusion when she gained that of love; she lost that of love when Clavigo
deceived her. If she could gain the illusion of sorrow, that would help. Her
sorrow would then grow to a man’s maturity and she would have compensation
for the loss. But her sorrow does not thrive, for she has not lost Clavigo, he has
deceived her; it remains ever an infant child with its wail, a child without father
and mother; for if Clavigo had been torn away from her, then in the memory of
his faithfulness and love it would have had a father, and in Marie’s infatuation a
mother. And she has nothing on which to rear it, for though the experience was a
beautiful one, it had no significance in itself, only as a foretaste of the future.
And she cannot hope this child of pain may be transformed into a son of joy, she
cannot hope for Clavigo to return, for she would not have the strength to endure
a future; she has lost the glad confidence with which she would have followed
him undaunted into the abyss, and she has acquired instead a hundred scruples;
the most she could do would be to experience the past once again. When Clavigo
left her, there stretched before her a future so beautiful, so enchanting, that it
nearly threw her thoughts into confusion; it exerted its power dimly over her, her
metamorphosis was already begun, then the development was checked. A new
life had been hinted at, she had felt its forces at work in her, then it was
destroyed and she recoiled, and there is no compensation for her, neither in this
nor the future world. The future smiled to greet her so richly and was mirrored in
her love’s illusion, and still everything was so natural and straightforward. Now
an impotent reflection may sometimes paint her an impotent illusion, with no
power to tempt her but able momentarily to soothe her. And so will time pass for
her until she has consumed the very object of her sorrow, which was not
identical with her sorrow but the occasion that made her constantly search for an
object of sorrow.
If someone possessed a letter which he knew or believed contained
information concerning what he had to consider his life’s blessedness, but the
written characters were thin and faded, the handwriting almost illegible, he
would read it and reread it, with anxiety and disquiet certainly, but with passion.
At one moment he would get one meaning out of it, the next another. When he
was quite sure he had managed to read a word, he would interpret everything in
the light of that word. But he would never pass beyond the same uncertainty
with which he began. He would stare, more and more anxiously, but the more he
stared the less he saw; sometimes his eyes filled with tears, but the more that
happened, again the less he saw. In due course the writing became weaker and
less distinct; finally the paper itself crumbled away and he had nothing left but
eyes blinded with tears.
2. Donna Elvira
We make this girl’s acquaintance in the opera Don Giovanni, and it will be of
some importance for our later investigation to take heed of the hints of her
earlier life contained in that piece. She had been a nun;
15
it is from the peace of a
convent that Don Giovanni has snatched her. This gives some indication of the
intensity of her passion. Here was no frivolous hussy from a boarding-school
who had learned to love in class and to flirt at dances; there is no great
significance in someone like that being seduced. Elvira, on the other hand, has
been brought up in the discipline of the convent, yet this has not been able to
root out passion, though it has indeed taught her to suppress it and so made it
even more violent once it is allowed to emerge. She is a sure prey for a Don
Giovanni; he will know how to coax out her passion, wild, ungovernable,
insatiable, to be satisfied only in his love. In him she has everything and the past
is nothing; if she leaves him she loses everything, including the past. After she
had renounced the world, there appeared a figure she could not renounce, and
that is Don Giovanni. Henceforth she renounces everything in order to live with
him. The more important the life she leaves behind, the more she must cling to
him; the more tightly she has embraced him, the more frightful her despair when
he abandons her. Already from the beginning her love is a despair; nothing in
heaven or on earth means anything to her except Don Giovanni.
In the opera Elvira interests us only so far as her relationship to Don Giovanni
has importance for him. Were I to suggest what this importance of hers is in a
few words, I would say, ‘She is Don Giovanni’s epic fate, the Commendatore his
dramatic fate.’ There is a hatred in her which will seek out Giovanni in every
out-of-the-way corner, a flame of fire which will illumine the darkest hidingplace, and should she still not bring him to light, there is a love within her that
will find him. She joins in with the others in pursuit of Don Giovanni, but were I
to imagine all powers neutralized, the efforts of his pursuers cancelling each
other out, so that it was up to Elvira alone and Don Giovanni was in her power,
then the hatred would arm her to murder him, but her love would forbid it; not
from sympathy, since for that he is too great in her eyes, and so she would
constantly keep him alive, for were she to kill him she would kill herself. So if
there were no other forces than Elvira turned against Don Giovanni, the opera
would never end; for, in order to avenge herself, Elvira would, if possible,
prevent the lightning itself from striking him, and yet she would again be unable
to take revenge herself. Such is the interest she has for us in the opera; but here
we are only concerned with her relationship to Don Giovanni so far as it is
significant for her. She is an object of interest to many, but in very different
ways. Don Giovanni has an interest in her before the piece begins; the audience
bestows its dramatic interest upon her; but we friends of sorrow, we follow her
not just to the end of the street, not only for the instant she crosses the stage; no,
we follow her upon her solitary way.
So Don Giovanni has seduced Elvira and abandoned her; it is quickly done, as
quickly as ‘a tiger can snap a lily’.
16 From the fact that in Spain alone there are
1,003, we can see that Don Giovanni is in a hurry and to some extent reckon the
speed. Don Giovanni has abandoned her, but there is no environment into whose
arms she can helplessly fall; she need have no fear of the environment closing
too tightly around her; it realizes, rather, that it should open wide its ranks to
make her departure easier. She need have no fear of anyone disputing her loss
with her, on the contrary, someone or other may perhaps take it upon himself to
try to prove it. She stands alone and abandoned, and there is no doubt that can
tempt her; it is clear that he was a deceiver who has taken everything from her
and exposed her to shame and dishonour. Aesthetically, however, this is not the
worst that can happen; it saves her, for a while, from that reflective sorrow which
is certainly more painful than immediate sorrow. The fact here is indubitable and
reflection cannot turn it now into one thing, now into another. A Marie
Beaumarchais may have loved a Clavigo just as violently, as wildly and
passionately; as far as her own passion goes, it may be altogether accidental that
the worst has not happened; she could almost wish that it had, for then, after all,
there would be an end of the story; she would be much more strongly armed
against him; but it has not happened. So in her case the fact is far more doubtful,
its reality will always be a secret between her and Clavigo. When she considers
the cold cunning, the shabby calculation required so to deceive her that in the
eyes of the world it appears something far less serious, and she herself is
exposed to the sort of sympathy that says, ‘Well now, good gracious, it’s not as
bad as all that’, it can arouse her, she can become practically insane at the
thought of the proud superiority in the face of which she has nevertheless meant
nothing, which has set her a limit and said, ‘thus far and no further’. And yet the
whole story can also be interpreted in another way, a nicer way. But as the
interpretation changes, so does the fact. Reflection, therefore, straightaway gets
enough to do and reflective sorrow is inescapable.
Don Giovanni has abandoned Elvira; at that instant everything is clear to her,
and there is no doubt to lure her grief into the seminar room of reflection. She is
mute in her despair. Her sorrow courses through her with a single beat of the
pulse, and it flows outwardly, the passion shines through her in a blaze and can
be seen in her outward appearance. Hate, despair, vengeance, love, all break
forth to make themselves visibly revealed. At this moment she is picturesque.
The imagination also therefore immediately presents us with a picture of her, and
here the external is not rendered indifferent, reflection upon it is not empty, and
its activity not without significance, as it proposes and disposes.
Whether she is at this moment an object of artistic representation is another
question. But what is certain is that at this moment she is visible and can be seen,
not of course in the sense that this or that actual Elvira can actually be seen,
which in most cases amounts to her not being seen, but the Elvira we imagine is
visible in her essentiality. Whether art is able to provide just that shade in her
expression that renders visible the point of her despair I leave open, but she can
be described, and the picture which thus appears is not a mere burden for the
memory that is neither here nor there, but has its validity. And who has not seen
Elvira!
It was early morning when I undertook a journey by foot in one of the
romantic parts of Spain. Nature awoke, the trees of the forest shook their heads,
and it was as though the leaves rubbed the sleep from their eyes; one tree bent to
the other to see if it had arisen, and the whole forest billowed in the fresh cool
breeze; a light mist rose from the earth, the sun snatched it away as if it were a
carpet under which it had rested during the night, and now looked down like a
loving mother upon the flowers and everything that had life, and said, ‘Arise,
dear children, the sun is already shining.’ As I rounded the end of a gully my eye
fell upon a monastery high up on the peak of the mountain, to which there led a
footpath with many turnings. My thoughts dwelt upon it. Thus it stands there, I
thought, like a house of God founded firmly upon the rock. My guide told me
that it was a convent famous for its strict discipline. My pace slackened, like my
thought; why hurry when so near the monastery? I should probably have come to
a full stop had I not been startled by a rapid movement nearby. Involuntarily I
turned; it was a knight who hastened past me. How handsome he was, his step so
light yet so full of strength, so royal and yet so fugitive! He turned his head to
look back, his countenance so captivating yet his glance so uneasy; it was Don
Giovanni. Is he hurrying to an assignation or is he coming from one? Yet he was
soon gone from my sight and out of my mind, and my glance was fixed on the
convent. I sank once more into contemplation of the joys of life and the quiet
peace of the convent, when up on the mountain I saw the figure of a woman. She
was hurrying headlong down the footpath, but the path was steep and it looked
all the time as though she were plunging down from the mountain. She came
nearer. Her countenance was pale, only her eyes blazed terribly, her body was
trembling, her bosom rose and fell violently, but still she hurried faster and
faster, her locks Hung about and scattered in the wind, but not even the fresh
morning breeze and her hurried pace could bring colour to her cheeks; her nun’s
veil was torn in shreds and flew behind, her thin white gown would have
betrayed much to a profane glance had not the passion in her face attracted even
the most depraved person’s glance. She rushed by me – I dared not address her,
her brow was too majestic, her glance too royal, her passion too high-born.
Where does this girl belong? In the convent? Have these passions their home
there? In the world? But the costume? – Why does she hurry? Is it to hide her
shame and disgrace or to catch up with Don Giovanni? She hastens on to the
forest and it closes around her and conceals her, and I see her no more but hear
only the forest’s sigh. Poor Elvira! Perhaps the trees have found out something –
and yet the trees are better than men, for the trees sigh and keep silent; men
whisper.
In this first moment Elvira can be represented, and even though art really
cannot take the measure of it, because it would be hard to find a unified
expression that also contained all the multiplicity of her passion, the soul
demands to see her. This I have tried to suggest through the little picture just
sketched. The idea of it was not actually to present her but only to suggest that a
description of her was in place, that it was not an arbitrary whim on my part but
a legitimate requirement of the idea. Yet this is just one moment and we must
follow Elvira further.
The most obvious movement is one in time. She maintains herself on that
almost picturesque point suggested in the foregoing, through a series of moments
in time. This gives her dramatic interest. In the haste with which she sped past
me she overtakes Don Giovanni. This, too, is quite as it should be seeing he has
abandoned her, but he has drawn her into his own life’s pace and she must reach
him. If she does reach him, her whole attention is then turned outward again and
we still do not get reflective sorrow. She has lost everything, she lost heaven
when she chose the world, the world when she lost Don Giovanni. So she has
nowhere to seek refuge except with him, it is only by being in his presence that
she can keep despair at a distance, either by drowning out the inner voices with
the clamour of hate and resentment, which resound only when Don Giovanni is
present, or by hoping. This latter indicates that the elements of reflective sorrow
are present already but have not yet been able to gather themselves inwardly.
‘She must first be cruelly convinced,’ reads Kruse’s adaptation,
17 but this
requirement completely betrays the inner disposition. If what has happened
hasn’t convinced her that Don Giovanni was a deceiver, nothing will. But as
long as she requires a further proof, she can succeed, with a restless, rootless life
constantly occupied in pursuing Don Giovanni, in escaping the inner unrest of a
quiet despair. The paradox already exists in her soul, but so long as she can keep
the soul agitated by external evidences not designed to explain the past but to
provide information about Don Giovanni’s present condition, she escapes
reflective sorrow. Hate, resentment, curses, prayers, imprecations alternate, but
her soul is still not turned back on itself in order to rest in the contemplation that
she is deceived. So when Kruse has Don Giovanni say:
‘Are you now disposed to hear,
To believe my words, you who suspect me;
Then I might almost say improbable
Is the cause that compelled,’ etc.,
one must be careful not to think that what, to the spectator’s ear, sounds like
mockery has the same effect upon Elvira. For her the words are a relief, for it is
the improbable she wants, and she wants to believe it just because it is
improbable.
If we now let Don Giovanni and Elvira come together, we have the choice of
letting either Don Giovanni or Elvira be the stronger. If he is the stronger, her
appearance on the scene loses all its point. She demands ‘proof to be cruelly
convinced’; he is gallant enough not to withhold it. But, naturally, she is not
convinced and demands a new proof; for demanding a new proof is an
alleviation, and the uncertainty is a relief. She then becomes but one witness
more to the exploits of Don Giovanni. But we could also imagine Elvira as the
stronger. It rarely happens, but we would do it out of gallantry to the sex. She
stands, then, in her full beauty still, for though she has wept, the tears have not
quenched the lustre in her eye, and though she has sorrowed, the sorrow has not
wasted her youthful vitality, and though she has fretted, her fretting has not
gnawed away the vitality of her beauty, and though her cheek has become pale,
the expression has become for that reason all the more soulful, and though she
does not glide with the lightness of childlike innocence, she steps forward with
the energetic firmness of womanly passion. This is how she confronts Don
Giovanni. She has loved him more than the whole world, more than the
blessedness of her own soul, she has lavished everything upon him, even her
honour, and he was unfaithful. Now she knows only one passion, it is hate; only
one thought, it is revenge. Thus she is as great as Don Giovanni; for seducing all
girls is the male equivalent of the woman’s letting herself be seduced once with
all her soul and now hating, or if you will, loving her seducer with an energy no
spouse possesses. This is how she confronts him, she does not lack the courage
to dare to have at him, she does not fight for moral principles, she fights for her
love, a love she does not base upon respect; she does not fight to be his mate, she
fights for her love, and this is not satisfied with a contrite faithfulness, it
demands revenge; for love of him she has thrown away her blessedness, and if it
were offered her once more she would throw it away again in order to avenge
herself.
Such a figure cannot fail to make an impression upon Don Giovanni. He
knows what pleasure lies in sucking in the finest and most fragrant flower of first
youth, he knows it is only a moment, and he knows what follows, he has seen
these pale figures often enough wither so quickly that one can almost see it
happening. But here a miracle has taken place, the laws of life’s ordinary course
are broken. He has seduced a young girl but her life is not extinguished, her
beauty has not faded; she is transformed and is more beautiful than ever. He
cannot deny it, she captivates him more than any girl has captivated him, more
than Elvira herself has done; for the innocent nun was still, in spite of all her
beauty, a girl like many others, his infatuation with her an adventure like many
another; but this girl is the only one of her kind. This girl is armed, she does not
conceal a dagger in her breast but she has an armour,
18 not visible, for her hatred
is not satisfied with speeches and declamations, but unseen, and it is her hatred.
Don Giovanni’s passion is aroused, she must be his once more; but not so. Yes, if
it were a girl who knew his baseness, who hated him although she had not been
deceived by him, then Don Giovanni would have won; but this girl he cannot
win, all his seduction is powerless. Had the voice been more ingratiating than his
own, the approach more insidious than his own, he still would not have moved
her; had the angels prayed for him, had the Mother of God been willing to be
bridesmaid at the wedding, still it would have been in vain. She will turn, not
away from him, as even, in the underworld, Dido turned away from Aeneas who
had deceived her, but towards him, even more coldly than Dido.
19
But this encounter of Elvira with Don Giovanni is only a moment of transition;
she walks across the stage, the curtain falls, but we, dear Symparanekromenoi,
we steal after, for only now does she really become Elvira. As long as she is in
the presence of Don Giovanni she is beside herself, when she comes to herself it
is time to think the paradox. Thinking a contradiction, in spite of all the
assurances of modern philosophy and the foolhardy courage of its young
adherents, must always involve great difficulty.
20 A young girl may well be
forgiven for finding it hard, and yet this is the task that is set for her, to think that
the one she loves was a deceiver. This she has in common with Marie
Beaumarchais, and yet there is a difference between the way in which they each
come to the paradox. The fact which Marie had to go on was in itself so
dialectical that reflection had straightaway to grasp hold of it with all its
appetitive urgency. In Elvira’s case the factual proof of Don Giovanni’s
deception seems so evident that it is not easy to see how reflection can get hold
of it. It therefore attacks the matter from another angle. Elvira has lost
everything, and yet her whole life lies before her and her soul demands a
pittance to live on. Here two possibilities present themselves: either to observe
ethical and religious categories or to preserve her love for Giovanni. If she does
the former she falls outside our interest; we gladly let her retire to a Magdalene
Institution,
21 or wherever else she wants. This, however, will probably strike her
as difficult, for to make it possible she must first despair; she has already known
the religious once, and a second time it makes great demands. The religious is,
altogether, a dangerous power to have anything to do with; it is jealous of itself
and will not be ridiculed. When she chose the convent her proud soul may have
found a rich satisfaction in it, for say what you will, no girl makes so brilliant a
match as she who gives herself in marriage to heaven; now, however, as a
penitent she must return in repentance and contrition. Moreover, there is always
the question of whether she can find a priest who can preach the gospel of
repentance and contrition with the same pith as Don Giovanni preached the glad
tidings of pleasure. In order, then, to save herself from this despair she must hold
on to Don Giovanni’s love, something she finds so much the easier seeing she
does after all still love him. Any third possibility is unthinkable; to be able to
seek comfort in the love of another would be more frightful still than the most
frightful of all. So she must love Don Giovanni for her own sake; self-defence
bids her do so. And this is the spur of reflection which forces her to gaze at this
paradox of whether she can love him although he deceived her. Whenever
despair would take hold of her, she takes refuge in the memory of Don
Giovanni’s love, and in order properly to come to terms with this refuge she is
tempted to think that he is no deceiver, even though she does this in many ways;
for a woman’s dialectic is remarkable, and only someone who has had the
opportunity to observe it can emulate it, whereas even the greatest dialectician
who has loved could speculate himself silly trying to produce it. […]
So Elvira cannot bring Don Giovanni to light, and now she has to find her way
out of her entanglement alone; she must come to herself. She has changed her
environment and so the support that might perhaps have helped to bring her
sorrow into the open is also removed. Her new circle knows nothing of her
earlier life, suspects nothing, for there is nothing peculiar or noteworthy in her
appearance, no marks of grief, no signpost saying ‘Here there is sorrow’. She
can control her every expression, for this is indeed something the loss of her
honour can teach her; and even though she sets no great store by people’s
judgements, she is at least able to avoid their condolences. So everything is in
order and she can reckon fairly safely on going through life without awakening
any suspicion in the minds of the inquisitive rabble which as a rule is as
dimwitted as it is inquisitive. She is in legal and undisputed possession of her
sorrow, and it is only if she is unlucky enough to fall foul of a professional
dealer in contraband
22
that she need fear any more penetrating search. What is
going on inside her? Does she sorrow? Indeed she does! But how are we to
describe this sorrow? I would call it an anxiety about how to support life; for
people’s lives consist not of food and drink alone, the soul too needs
nourishment. She is young and yet her life’s supply is exhausted, but it does not
follow that she dies. Every day she is in this respect anxious for the morrow. She
cannot stop loving him and yet he deceived her, but if he deceived her, then her
love has lost its power to sustain. Yes, had he not deceived her, had a higher
power torn him away, then she would have been as well supplied as any girl
could wish; for the memory of Don Giovanni amounted to considerably more
than many a living husband. But if she gives up her love she is reduced to
beggary, she will have to return to the convent in shame and dishonour. Yes, if
even that could buy back his love! So she lives on. This, the present day, it
seems to her she can still last out, she still has some left-over to live on; but the
day after, she fears for that. Then she ponders over and over again, she grasps at
every expedient yet finds none, and so she can never sorrow consistently and
soundly because she is always trying to find out how to sorrow.
‘Forget him, that’s what I want, tear his image from my heart, ransack myself
like a consuming fire, and every thought that belongs to him shall be incinerated;
only then will I be saved; it is self-defence, and if I do not tear out every thought
of him, even the remotest, I am done for. Only thus can I protect myself. Myself
– what is this self of mine? Wretchedness and misery. To my first love I was
unfaithful and am I now to try to make up for it by being unfaithful to my
second?
‘No, I will hate him; only so can I find rest and occupation. I will weave a
garland of curses out of all that reminds me of him, and for every kiss I say “A
curse on you!”, and for every embrace “Ten curses on you!”, and for every time
he swore that he loved me I shall swear that I will hate him. This will be my
work, my task, to this I shall dedicate myself. At the convent I am used to
repeating my rosary, and so I shall be a nun after all, praying early and late. Or
should I be content that he once loved me? Maybe I should be a sensible girl
who didn’t throw him away in proud contempt, now that I know he is a deceiver.
Perhaps I ought to be a good housewife who knows how to be frugal and make a
little go as far as possible. No, I will hate him, for that is the only way I can tear
myself away from him and prove to myself that I am not in need of him. But am
I not in his debt when I hate him? Am I not then living at his expense? For what
else is it that feeds my hate except my love of him?
‘He was no deceiver, he had no idea what a woman can suffer. If he had, he
would not have left me. He was a man, sufficient unto himself. Is that a
consolation for me? Certainly, for my suffering and torment show me how happy
I have been, so happy that he has no conception of it. So why do I complain? A
man is not like a woman, not as happy as she when she is happy, not as unhappy
as she when she is boundlessly unhappy because her happiness knew no bounds.
‘Did he deceive me? No! Had he promised me anything? No! My Giovanni
was no suitor, he was a wretched poultry thief; a nun does not degrade herself for
the likes of that. He did not ask for my hand, he stretched out his own; I grasped
it; he looked at me, I was his; he opened his arms, I belonged to him. I went with
him, I twined myself around him like a plant, I rested my head upon his breast
and gazed into that omnipotent countenance with which he conquered the world,
and yet which rested on me as if for him I were the whole world. Like a child at
the breast I sucked abundance, wealth and bliss. Can I ask for more? Was I not
his? Was he not mine? And if he was not, was I any the less his? When the gods
roamed the earth and fell in love with women, were they faithful to their loved
ones? Yet no one thinks of saying that they deceived them! And why not?
Because they will have it that a girl should be proud of having been loved by a
god. And what are all the gods of Olympus compared to my Giovanni? And
should I not be proud, should I degrade him, should I insult him in my thoughts,
let them force him into the narrow, miserable laws that apply to ordinary men?
No, I will be proud that he has loved me; he was greater than the gods, and I will
honour him by making myself nothing. I will love him because he belonged to
me, love him because he left me, and still I am constantly his and will treasure
what he squanders.
‘No, I cannot think of him. Every time my thoughts approach that hiding-place
in my soul where his memory dwells, it is as if I committed a sin. I feel an
anguish, an inexpressible anguish, an anguish like that I felt in the convent when
I sat in my solitary cell waiting for him, terrified of the thought of the prioress’s
stern contempt, the convent’s terrible punishment, my crime against God. And
yet wasn’t this anguish part of it? What would my love for him have been
without it? After all, he was not consecrated to me, we had not received the
blessing of the Church, the bells had not tolled for us, the hymn had not been
sung, and yet what were all the music and festivity of the Church? What power
could it have to prepossess me compared with my anguish? – But then he came,
and the discord of my anguish resolved itself into the harmony of the most
blissful security, and only sweet tremblings luxuriantly moved my soul. Am I
then to fear this anguish? Does it not remind me of him, does it not announce his
coming? If I could remember him without the anguish it would not be him I
remembered. He comes, he invites quiet, he is master of spirits which would tear
me from him. I am his, blessed in him.’
If I were to imagine someone in distress at sea, unconcerned for his own life,
remaining on board because there was something he wanted to save and could
not because he was at a loss what it was he should save, I would have a picture
of Elvira; she is in distress at sea, her destruction is approaching, but that does
not concern her, she does not notice, she is at a loss what it is she is to save.
3. Margrete
We know this girl from Goethe’s Faust. A young, commonplace girl, not, like
Elvira, destined for the convent, yet brought up in the fear of the Lord, even if
her soul was too childlike to feel the gravity of it, as Goethe so incomparably
says:
Half sport of childhood,
Half God within thee!
23
What we especially love in this girl is the delightful simplicity and humility of
her pure soul. Straightaway, the first time she sees Faust, she feels too inferior to
be loved by him, and it is not out of curiosity to learn whether Faust loves her
that she plucks the petals of the daisy, but from humility because she feels
herself too unworthy to make a choice, and therefore bows to the oracle-myth of
a mysterious power. Yes, lovely Margrete! Goethe has told us how you plucked
the petals and recited the words, ‘He loves me, he loves me not’; poor Margrete,
you can just carry on this occupation, only changing the words, ‘He deceived
me, he deceived me not’. You can cultivate a little plot of ground with flowers of
this kind, and you will have employment for the rest of your life.
It has been pointed out how remarkable it is that, while the Don Juan legend
tells of 1,003 seductions in Spain alone, the story of Faust tells of only one girl
seduced.
24
It is worth bearing this observation in mind, since it will be important
for what follows; it will help us to determine the special nature of Margrete’s
reflective sorrow. At first glance it might seem that the only difference between
Elvira and Margrete was that between two distinct individuals who have had the
same experience, but the difference is far more essential than that, though based
not so much upon the difference in their feminine natures as in the essential
difference to be found between a Don Juan and a Faust. There must be a
difference from the beginning between an Elvira and a Margrete, inasmuch as a
girl who is to have an effect on a Faust must differ in essentials from one who
has an effect on a Don Juan; yes, even if I imagined that the same girl occupied
the attentions of both, the one would still be attracted by something different
from the other. This difference, at the beginning present only as a possibility,
will, by being brought into relation with a Faust or a Don Juan, develop into
something completely actual. Certainly Faust is a reproduction of Don Juan; but
precisely his being a reproduction makes him, even in that stage of his life when
he can be called a Don Juan, differ essentially from the latter; for to reproduce
another stage means not just to become that stage, but to become it with all the
elements of the preceding stage within one. Therefore, even if what he desires is
the same as a Don Juan, still he desires it in a different manner. But in order for
him to desire it in a different manner, it must also be present in a different
manner. There are elements in him which make his method different, just as
there are also elements in Margrete which make another method necessary. His
method depends in turn upon his liking, and that differs from Don Juan’s even if
there is an essential similarity between them.
People usually think there is great wisdom in pointing out that Faust ends up
becoming a Don Juan; yet it says very little, for the question is in what sense he
becomes one. Like Don Juan, Faust is a demonic figure, but at a higher level.
The sensual only becomes important for him after he has lost a whole world, but
awareness of this loss is not erased, it is constantly there, and therefore what he
seeks in the sensual is not so much pleasure as distraction. His doubting soul
finds nothing it can rest in and now he grasps for love, not because he believes in
it but because it has an element of presenthood in which there is rest for a
moment and a striving which distracts and diverts his attention from the
nothingness of doubt. Hence his enjoyment does not have the cheerfulness that
distinguishes a Don Juan. His countenance is not smiling, his brow is not
unclouded, and happiness is not his companion; young girls do not dance into his
embrace, he attracts them through fear. What he seeks is not just sensual
pleasure, what he desires is the immediacy of spirit. As the shades of the
underworld, when they got hold of someone living, sucked the blood from him
and lived as long as this blood warmed and nourished them, so Faust seeks an
immediate life that can renew and strengthen him. And where better can this be
found than in a young girl, and how more perfectly can he imbibe it than in the
embrace of love? As the Middle Ages tell of sorcerers who knew how to prepare
an elixir for the renewal of youth, and used the heart of an innocent child for that
purpose, so his enervated soul needs this strengthening potion, the only thing
that for a moment can satisfy him. His sick soul needs what one might call a
young heart’s first green shoots; and with what else am I to compare an innocent
feminine soul’s first youth? To call it a bloom would be to say too little; for it is
more, it is a blossoming. The good health of hope and faith and trust sprouts
forth and blossoms in rich variety, and gentle yearnings move the delicate
shoots, and dreams cast their shadow on its fruitfulness. This is how it affects a
Faust; it beckons his restless soul like an island of peace in the tranquil sea. That
it is transient no one knows better than Faust; he believes in it as little as he
believes in anything else; but that it exists, of that he convinces himself in love’s
embrace. Only the fullness of innocence and childlikeness can for a moment
refresh him.
In Goethe’s Faust, Mephistopheles lets Faust see Margrete in a mirror. His eye
finds pleasure in beholding her, but it is not after all her beauty he desires,
although he accepts that too. What he desires is the pure, untroubled, rich,
immediate happiness of a woman’s soul, yet he desires this not spiritually but
sensually. In a sense, then, he does desire like Don Juan, but still he desires quite
differently. Here perhaps one or another privatdocent,
25 convinced he has been a
Faust, since otherwise he could never have become privatdocent, will remark
that Faust requires intellectual development and culture in the woman who is to
attract him. Perhaps a considerable number of privatdocents will find this an
excellent remark, and their respective wives and sweethearts will nod in assent.
However, it completely misses the mark, for Faust would desire nothing less. A
so-called cultured woman would belong within the same relativity as himself
and this, notwithstanding, would have no significance at all for him, would
simply be nothing. With her crumb of culture, she might perhaps tempt this old
magister of doubt to take her out on the river, where she would then soon
despair. An innocent young girl, on the other hand, belongs within another
relativity, and is therefore, in a sense, nothing as against Faust, yet in another
sense tremendously much, since she is immediacy. Only in this immediacy is she
an object of his desire, and that is why I said that he desires immediacy not
spiritually but sensually.
All this Goethe has seen to perfection, and so Margrete is a commonplace little
girl, a girl one might almost be tempted to call insignificant. Now, since it is
important for Margrete’s sorrow, we shall consider a little more closely the effect
Faust must have had upon her. The individual traits Goethe has emphasized are
naturally of great value, yet I believe that for the sake of completeness we must
imagine a little modification. In her innocent simplicity, Margrete soon notices
that with Faust all is not as it should be in respect of his faith. In Goethe this is
brought out in a little catechism scene,
26 which is undeniably an excellent
invention by the poet. The question now is what consequences this examination
can have on their relation to each other. Faust appears as the doubter, and for
want of further evidence it seems that Goethe intended to let Faust remain a
doubter also in Margrete’s eyes. He has done his best to keep her mind off all
such inquiries and to fix it solely on the reality of love. But, on the one hand, I
think Faust would find that difficult once the issue had been raised, and on the
other, I believe it is incorrect psychologically. It is not for Faust’s sake that I
shall dwell further on this point but for Margrete’s, for if he has not revealed
himself to her as a doubter her sorrow contains an additional element. Faust is a
doubter, then, but he is no vain dupe who merely wants to feel his own
importance by doubting what others believe; his doubt has an objective ground
in himself. Let that much be said in Faust’s favour.
On the other hand, the moment he wants to implicate others in his doubt, an
impure passion can easily become mixed up in it. As soon as the doubt is made
to implicate others, an envy is involved that takes pleasure in depriving them of
what they take to be certainties. But for this passion of envy to be aroused in the
doubter, there must be some question of an opposition on the part of the
individual concerned. Where either no such question can arise or it would be
inapposite to imagine it, the temptation ceases. This latter is the case with a
young girl. Confronted with her, a doubter always finds himself in difficulties.
Depriving her of her faith is no task for him; on the contrary, he feels it is only
faith that makes her the great thing she is. He feels himself humbled, for there is
a natural demand in her that he should be her protector inasmuch as she herself
has become hesitant. Yes, a poor wretch of a doubter, a conceited smatterer,
might perhaps find satisfaction in depriving a young girl of her faith and
pleasure in frightening women and children, since he cannot terrify men. But this
is not true of Faust; he is too big for that. We may well agree with Goethe, then,
that Faust betrays his doubt a first time, but on the other hand I hardly think it
will happen to him a second time.
This is of great importance for our understanding of Margrete. Faust readily
sees that Margrete’s entire significance depends on her innocent simplicity; take
this away and she is nothing in herself, nothing to him. So this has to be
preserved. He is a doubter, but as such has within himself all it takes to conceive
positively of faith, for otherwise he is a poor doubter. What he lacks is the final
conclusion and it is this that makes all the components of his outlook negative.
She, on the contrary, has the conclusion; she has childlikeness and innocence.
Nothing is therefore easier than for him to equip her. His experience has taught
him often enough that what he propounded as doubt seemed to others to be
positive truth. So now he finds his happiness in enriching her with the rich
content of a view of life; he brings out all the finery of immediate faith; he
delights in adorning her with it because it looks well on her and she thereby
becomes more beautiful in his eyes. From this he also derives the advantage that
her soul clings more and more closely to his. Really she doesn’t understand him
at all. She clings to him like a child, for what is doubt to him is for her unfailing
truth. But while he thus builds up her faith, at the same time he undermines it,
for in the end he becomes for her an object of faith, a god and not a man.
Except that I must try to avert a misunderstanding. It might seem that I make
Faust out to be a contemptible hypocrite. This is not at all the case. It is Gretchen
herself who has brought the matter up; with half an eye he surveys the glory she
thinks she possesses and sees that it cannot withstand his doubt, but he does not
have it in his heart to destroy it, and now his conduct is even motivated by a
certain kindliness. Her love gives her meaning for him and yet she remains
almost a child; he descends to her childlike level and finds his joy in seeing how
she makes everything her own. For Margrete’s future, however, this has the most
sorrowful consequences. Had Faust revealed himself to her as a doubter, she
might perhaps later have been able to save her faith; she would then in all
humility have known that his high-flown and daring thoughts were not for her;
she would have kept hold of what she had. But now, on the contrary, she owes
him the content of her faith, and yet she realizes, seeing he has abandoned her,
that he has not believed in it himself. As long as he was with her, she did not
discover the doubt; now that he is gone, everything is changed for her and she
sees doubt everywhere, a doubt she cannot control, since she always associates it
with the circumstance that Faust himself has been unable to master it.
What it is about Faust that captivates Margrete, according to Goethe, is not the
seductive talent of a Don Juan but his immense superiority. Therefore, as she so
touchingly puts it, she simply cannot understand what Faust finds in her.
27 Her
first impression of him is altogether overwhelming, over against him she
becomes nothing at all. She belongs to him, therefore, not in the same sense as
Elvira belongs to Don Juan, for that still expresses an independent existence in
relation to the latter, but she altogether disappears in him. Nor does she break
with heaven to belong to him, for that would give her a claim on him;
imperceptibly, without the remotest reflection, he becomes her all. But just as
she is thus nothing from the beginning, so, if I may put it in this way, she
becomes less and less the more she is convinced of his almost divine superiority;
she is nothing and exists only in him. What Goethe has somewhere said about
Hamlet,
28
that in relation to his body his soul was an acorn planted in a flowerpot which finally shatters the vessel, is true of Margrete’s love. Faust is too great
for her, and her love must end by splitting her soul apart. And the moment for
this cannot be long awaiting, for Faust no doubt feels she cannot remain in this
immediacy; but then he does not carry her up into the higher regions of the spirit,
for it is from these that he is fleeing; he desires her sensually – and abandons her.
So Faust has abandoned Margrete. Her loss is so terrible that her circle itself
forgets for a moment what it usually finds so hard to forget, that she has been
dishonoured. She reclines in a total impotence in which she is unable even to
think of her loss; the strength even to conceive her misfortune is taken from her.
Were this condition to continue, it would be impossible for reflective sorrow to
occur. Yet, little by little, the consolations she can derive from her environment
will bring her to herself, give her thought a jolt that sets it in motion again; but
once it is mobilized it is clear that she is incapable of holding on to a single one
of its considerations. She listens to her thoughts as though they were not
addressed to her, and not a word of them halts or accelerates the unrest in her
mind. Her problem is the same as Elvira’s, to believe that Faust was a deceiver;
but it is even more difficult because she is far more profoundly influenced by
Faust; he wasn’t just a deceiver, but he was indeed a hypocrite; she has not
surrendered anything for him, but she owes him everything, and to some extent
she still possesses this everything, except that it now proves to be a deception.
But then is what he said less true because he himself did not believe it? Not at
all, and yet that is how it is for her, for it was through him that she believed it.
It might seem more difficult for reflection to be mobilized in Margrete; what
stops it is her feeling that she was absolutely nothing. Yet there is a tremendous
dialectical elasticity in this feeling. Were she able to hold on to the thought that
she was, in the strictest sense of the word, absolutely nothing, reflection would
be excluded. She would then not have been deceived, for when you are nothing
there is no relation, and where there is no relation there can be no question of a
deception. So far she is at rest. This thought cannot be kept hold of, however, but
immediately veers to its opposite. That she was nothing is merely the expression
of the fact that all the finite differences of love are negated, and is therefore
precisely the expression of her love’s absolute validity, and in that in turn lies her
absolute justification. His conduct, then, is not just a deception but an absolute
deception, because her love was absolute. And here again she will not rest, for
since he has been everything to her she will not be able to hold on even to this
thought except through him; but she cannot think it through him, because he was
a deceiver.
As her environment now becomes increasingly alien to her, so begins the inner
movement. She has not merely loved Faust with all her soul, he was her vital
force; it was through him she came into being. The effect of this is that while her
soul will not be less agitated in its mood than an Elvira’s, the individual moods
will be less agitated. She is on the way to having a fundamental mood, and the
individual mood is like a bubble rising from the depths, without the strength to
maintain itself nor yet displaced by another bubble but dissolved in the general
mood that she is nothing. This fundamental mood is again a state that is felt,
which does not express itself in any individual outburst; it is inexpressible, and
the attempt the individual mood makes to give it life, to raise it up, is in vain.
The total mood therefore constantly resounds in the particular mood, creating its
resonance in the form of impotence and vapidity. The individual mood is
expressed but it does not soothe, it does not ease; it is […] a false sigh which
frustrates, and not the healthy exercise of a normal sigh. Nor is the individual
mood full-toned and energetic; for that her utterance is too troubled.
‘Can I forget him? Can the brook, however far it flows, forget its source, forget
its head-spring, cut itself off from it? Then it would have to cease flowing! Can
the arrow, however swiftly it flies, forget the bowstring? Then its flight would
have to halt! Can the raindrop, however far it falls, forget the sky from which it
fell? Then it would have to dissolve! Can I become another, can I be born again
of a mother who is not my mother? Can I forget him? Then I would have to
cease to be!
‘Can I remember him? Can my memory call him forth, now, when he has
vanished, I who am myself merely my memory of him? This faded, nebulous
picture, is it the Faust I worshipped? I remember his words but I do not possess
the harp in his voice! I remember his speeches but my breast is too weak to give
them content! They ring out meaninglessly for deaf ears!
‘Faust, oh Faust! come back, satisfy the hungry, clothe the naked, restore the
faint, visit the lonely! Well I know that my love had no meaning for you, but
neither did I demand that. My love laid itself humbly at your feet, my sigh was a
prayer, my kiss a thank-offering, my embrace an act of adoration. Is that why
you forsake me? Did you not know it beforehand? Or is it not a reason to love
me that I love you, that my soul expires when you are not with me?
‘God in heaven, forgive me for having loved a man more than you, yet I do so
still. I know it is a sin that I speak thus to you. Eternal love, oh! let your mercy
sustain me; do not reject me; give him back to me, incline his heart once more to
me; have pity on me, oh pity! that I pray thus again!
‘Can I curse him, then? What am I, that I should be so bold? Can the earthen
vessel presume against the potter? What was I? Nothing! The clay in his hand, a
rib from which he made me! What was I? A lowly plant, and he bent down to
me, he caused me to grow; he was everything to me, my god, the origin of my
mind, the nourishment of my soul!
‘Can I sorrow? No, no! Sorrow broods like a night mist over my soul. Oh!
come back, I will give you up, never demand to belong to you; just sit with me,
look at me, that I might gain strength to sigh; speak to me, speak of yourself, as
though you were a stranger; I will forget that it is you; speak, that the tears may
burst forth. Am I then absolutely nothing, unable even to weep without him?
‘Where shall I find rest and peace? The thoughts rise up in my soul, the one
against the other, the one confounding the other. When you were with me, they
obeyed your beck and call, I played with them as a child, I wove garlands with
them and placed them on my head; I let them flutter loose like my hair in the
wind. Now they coil themselves terrifyingly about me, like snakes they twine
about and crush my anguished soul.
‘And I am a mother! A living creature demands nourishment of me. Can the
hungry satisfy the hungry, the faint slake the thirst of the thirsty? Am I to
become a murderer; then? Oh! Faust, come back, save the child in the womb,
even if you will not save the mother!’
Thus is she moved, not by moods, but in her mood. But the individual mood
does not relieve her, because it dissolves in the total mood she cannot annul. Yes,
if Faust had been taken from her, then Margrete would not have looked for
relief; her lot would still have been enviable in her eyes – but she is deceived.
She lacks what might be called the situation of sorrow, for she is not able to
sorrow alone. Yes, if, like a poor Florine in the fairytale,
29 she could find access
to some grotto of echoes, from which she knew that every sigh, every complaint,
was heard by the loved one, she would not, like Florine, spend only three nights
there, she would stay there day and night; but in Faust’s palace there is no echogrotto, and he has no ear in her heart.
I have, perhaps, already held your attention for too long, dear
Symparanekromenoi; the more so since, however much I have spoken, nothing
visible has appeared before you. Yet the reason for this lies not in the
deceptiveness of my presentation, but in the matter itself and in sorrow’s
cunning. When the favourable occasion is offered, the hidden reveals itself. This
we have in our power, and in farewell we shall let these three brides of sorrow
come together, let them embrace one another in a unison of sorrow, let them
form a group before us, a tabernacle where the voice of sorrow does not become
silent, where the sigh does not cease, because they themselves watch more
scrupulously and faithfully than vestal virgins over the observance of the holy
rites. Ought we to interrupt them in this occupation? Should we wish them their
loss restored? Would that be a gain for them? Have they not already received a
higher consecration? And this consecration will unite them, and cast a beauty
upon their union, and bring them relief in their union. For only someone who has
been bitten by snakes knows what the victim of a snake-bite suffers.
5 THE UNHAPPIEST ONE
An Enthusiastic Address to
Symparanekromenoi
Peroration in the Friday Meetings
SOMEWHERE in England is said to be a grave distinguished not by a splendid
monument or sad surroundings, but by a small inscription: ‘The Unhappiest
One’. Apparently someone opened the grave but found no trace of the corpse.
What is the more surprising, that no corpse was found or that the grave was
opened? Strange, indeed, that someone should have gone to the trouble to find
out if there was anyone in it. When you read a name on an epitaph you are easily
led to wonder how it went with his life in the world; one would like to climb
down into the grave to converse with him. But this inscription, it says so much!
A book may have a title which makes you want to read it, but a title can be so
evocative, so personally appealing, that you will never read the book. Truly, this
inscription is so full of meaning – harrowing or joyful, according to one’s mood
– for anyone who in the stillness of his heart may have secretly betrothed himself
to the thought that he was die unhappiest. But I can imagine someone whose
soul knows no such preoccupations, whose curiosity it was that undertook the
task of finding out if there really was someone in this grave. And lo and behold
die tomb was empty! Has he perhaps risen from the dead, has he perhaps wanted
to mock the words of the poet:
… In the grave there is peace,
Its silent dweller not acquainted with grief.
1
Did he find no rest, not even in the grave; does he perhaps wander restlessly
about in die world? Has he forsaken his house, his home, leaving only his
address behind? Or is he not yet found, this the unhappiest one, whom not even
the furies pursue until he finds the door of the temple and the seat of die humble
suppliant; but whom sorrows keep alive, sorrows follow to the grave!
2
If it is true that he is not yet found, then dear Symparanekromenoi, let us enter
upon a pilgrimage, not to the holy tomb in the happy East, but to this sorrowful
grave in the unhappy West. By that empty grave we shall look for him, the
unhappiest one, certain to find him; for as the yearning of the faithful longs for
the holy tomb, so do the unhappy feel drawn west to that empty grave, each
filled with the thought that it is destined for him.
Or should such a consideration not be worthy of our attention? We whose
activities are, if I am to conform with the sacred tradition of our society,
experiments in aphoristic and accidental devotion, we who do not merely think
and speak aphoristically but live aphoristically, we who live aphorismenoi and
segregati,
3
like aphorisms in life, without society of men, not sharing their
sorrows and their joys; we who are not consonants sounding together in the
noise of life, but solitary birds in the stillness of night, gathered together only
now and then, to be edified by representations of life’s misery, the length of the
day, and the endless duration of time; we, dear Symparanekromenoi, who have
no faith in the game of happiness or the fortune of fools, we who believe in
nothing but misfortune.
See how they press forward in their countless multitudes, all the unhappy! Yet,
many though they are who believe they are called, few are the chosen. A
distinction is to be established between them – a word, and the crowd vanishes;
for excluded, uninvited guests are all those who think the greatest misfortune is
death, those who became unhappy because it was death they feared; for we, dear
Symparanekromenoi, we, like the Roman soldiers, do not fear death; we know of
greater misfortunes, and first and last and above all – life. Yes, if there were a
human being who could not die, if the story of the eternally wandering Jew were
true, how could we scruple to call him the unhappiest? We could then also
explain why the grave was empty, to indicate that the unhappiest person was the
one who could not die, could not slip down into a grave. The matter would then
be decided, the answer easy; for the unhappiest would be the one who could not
die, the happy man the one who could; happy the one who died in his old age,
happier the one who died at birth, happiest of all the one who was never born.
But that is not how it is; death is the common fortune of all men, and therefore,
in so far as the unhappiest has not yet been found, it is within these confines he
must be sought.
See how the crowd disappeared, how diminished are their numbers. I need not
now say, ‘Give me your attention’, for I know that I have it; nor ‘Lend me your
ears’; I know they are mine. Your eyes sparkle. You rise in your seats. It is a
contest for a wager well worth joining in, a struggle more terrible even than if
the issue were life or death, for death we do not fear. But the reward, yes, it is
grander than any other in the world, and more certain; for the one who is assured
of being the unhappiest, that man need fear no good fortune; he shall not taste
the humiliation in his last hour of having to cry: ‘Solon, Solon, Solon!’
4
So we open a free competition from which none are to be excluded, by either
rank or age. No one is excluded except the happy man and the one who fears
death – every worthy member of the community of the unhappy is welcome, the
seat of honour assigned to every really unhappy person, the grave to the
unhappiest. My voice rings forth in the world; hear it, all you who call
yourselves unhappy in the world yet fear not death. My voice rings back in time,
for we will not be so sophistical as to exclude the departed because they are
dead; after all, they have lived. I beseech you, forgive me for disturbing your rest
for a moment, meet us here at this empty grave. Three times I let the cry ring out
high over the world; hear it, you unhappy ones; for it is not our intention to
decide the matter among ourselves in a corner. The place has been found where
it must be decided before the whole world.
But before passing on to our individual hearings, let us make ourselves
qualified to sit here as worthy judges and competitors. Let us strengthen our
thoughts, arm them against the charms of the ear, for what voice is quite so
ingratiating as that of the unhappy man when he speaks of his own misfortune?
Let us make ourselves worthy to sit as judges, competitors, that we do not lose
perspective, are not put off by the individuals themselves, for the eloquence of
sorrow is infinite and infinitely inventive. We would divide the unhappy into
definite groups and let only one speak for each; for this we will not deny, that no
particular individual is the unhappiest; it is a class. But we would not scruple for
that reason to award to the representative for this class the name ‘the unhappiest
one’, nor hesitate to assign him the grave.
In all Hegel’s systematic writings there is a section dealing with the unhappy
consciousness.
5
It is always with qualms and palpitations that one approaches the
reading of inquiries like this, with a fear that one might learn too much or too
little. Brought up casually in conversation, the term ‘unhappy consciousness’ can
practically turn your blood into ice, set your nerves aquiver; seeing it
pronounced now so expressly – like that mysterious word in a story of Clemens
Brentano’s, tertia nux mors est
6 – can make you tremble like a sinner. Ah! happy
the one who has no more to do with this matter than write a section on the
subject, happier still he who can write the next. For the unhappy person is he
who has his ideal, the content of his life, the fullness of his consciousness, his
real nature in some way or other outside himself. The unhappy man is always
absent from himself, never present to himself. But one can be absent, obviously,
either in the past or in the future. This adequately circumscribes the entire
territory of the unhappy consciousness. For this firm delimitation we would
thank Hegel, and now, since we are not simply philosophers looking upon this
kingdom from afar, we shall as natives devote attention in detail to the various
stages that lie within it. So the unhappy one is absent. But one is absent either
when living in the past or when living in the future. The form of expression is
important, for it is evident, as philology also teaches us, that there is a tense that
expresses presence in the past, and a tense that expresses presence in the future;
but the same science also teaches us that there is a pluperfect tense in which
there is no present, as well as a future perfect tense with the same characteristic.
These are the hoping and the remembering individuals. Inasmuch as they are
only hoping or only remembering, these are indeed in a sense unhappy
individuals, if otherwise it is only the person who is present to himself that is
happy. However, one cannot strictly call an individual unhappy who is present in
hope or in memory. For what one must note here is that he is still present to
himself in one of these. From which we also see that a single blow, be it ever so
heavy, cannot possibly make a person the unhappiest. For one blow can either
deprive him of hope, still leaving him present in memory, or of memory, still
leaving him present in hope. We now proceed further and see what more detailed
description can be given of the unhappy individual.
Consider first the hoping individual. When, as a hoping individual (and of
course to that extent unhappy), he is not present to himself, he becomes unhappy
in a stricter sense. An individual who hopes for an eternal life is, indeed, in a
certain sense an unhappy individual to the extent that he renounces the present,
but nevertheless is strictly not unhappy, because he is present to himself in this
hope and does not come in conflict with the particular moments of finitude. But
if he cannot become present to himself in hope, but loses his hope, hopes again,
and so on, then he is absent from himself not just in the present but also in the
future, and we have a type of the unhappy. Similarly if we consider the
remembering individual. If he finds himself present in the past, strictly he is not
unhappy; but if he cannot do that but remains constantly absent from himself in a
past, then we have a form of the unhappy.
Memory is pre-eminently the real element of the unhappy, as is natural seeing
the past has the remarkable characteristic that it is gone, the future that it is yet to
come; and one can therefore say in a sense that the future is nearer the present
than is the past. The future, for the hoping individual to be present in it, must be
real, or rather must acquire reality for him. The past, for the remembering
individual to be present in it, must have had reality for him. But when the hoping
individual would have a future which can have no reality for him, or the
remembering individual remember a past which has had no reality for him, then
we have the genuinely unhappy individuals. The first of these one might think
impossible, or consider sheer madness, but that is not so, for though the hoping
individual does not hope for something that has no reality for him, he hopes for
something he himself knows cannot be realized. For when an individual loses his
hope, and instead of becoming a remembering individual, wants to remain a
hoping one, then we get this form. When an individual who loses his memory, or
has nothing to remember, will not become a hoping one but remains a
remembering one, that is a form of the unhappy. Thus were an individual to lose
himself in antiquity, or in the Middle Ages, or whatever other period, but in such
a way that this was definitely real for him, or if he lost himself in his own
childhood or youth in such a way that that was decidedly real for him, then
strictly he would not be a genuinely unhappy individual. Were I to imagine, on
the other hand, a person who has never had a childhood himself, this age having
passed him by without acquiring significance for him, but who now, say by
becoming a teacher of children, discovered all the beauty that lies in childhood,
and would now remember his own childhood, always look back upon it; then he
indeed would be a very fitting example. He wants in retrospect to discover the
significance of what, for him, is past and nevertheless remember it in its
significance. Were I to imagine someone who had lived without appreciating the
joy of life, or its pleasures, and who now at death’s door caught sight of it, but
didn’t die, which would have been the best, but revived though not to live over
again, then he could well be considered in the matter of who was the unhappiest.
Unhappy individuals who hope never have the same pain as those who
remember. Hoping individuals always have a more gratifying disappointment.
The unhappiest one will always, therefore, be found among the unhappy
rememberers.
But we proceed further and imagine a combination of the two, strictly
speaking, unhappy forms just described. The unhappy hoping individual was not
able to be present to himself in his hope, similarly with the unhappy rememberer.
The combination can only be this: that what prevents him being present in hope
is memory, and what prevents him being present in memory is hope. This is what
it amounts to: on the one hand, he constantly hopes for something he should be
remembering, his hope is constantly disappointed, but on its being disappointed
he discovers that the reason is not that the goal has been moved further on but
that he has gone past it, that it has already been experienced, or is supposed to
have been, and has thus passed over into memory. On the other hand, he
constantly remembers something he should be hoping for; for in thought the
future is something he has already taken up, he has experienced it in thought,
and that which he has experienced is something he remembers instead of hopes
for. Consequently what he hopes for lies behind him, and what he remembers
lies before him. His life is not backwards but back-to-front in two directions. He
will soon notice his misfortune even if he does not grasp what it really consists
in. But to make sure that he really gets the chance to feel it, that
misunderstanding comes along which every moment in a remarkable way casts
ridicule. He enjoys, for everyday purposes, the reputation of being in his right
mind, yet he knows that were he to explain to a single person just how things
were with him, he would be declared mad. This itself is enough to drive a person
mad, yet he does not become so, and that is precisely his misfortune. His
misfortune is that he has come to the world too soon and is therefore constantly
arriving too late. He is forever quite close to the goal and the same moment at a
distance from it; he now discovers that what it is that makes him unhappy,
because now he has it, or because he is this way, is precisely what a few years
ago would have made him happy if he had had it then, whereas then he was
unhappy because he did not have it. His life has no meaning, like that of
Ancaeus, of whom it is customary to say that nothing is known of him except
that he gave rise to a proverb: ‘There’s many a slip ‘twixt the cup and the lip’,
7
as if this were not more than enough. His life knows no rest and has no content,
he is not present to himself in the moment, not present to himself in the future,
for the future has been experienced, and not in the past, because the past has still
not arrived. Thus is he chased about, like Latona to the Hyperborean darkness, to
the bright isle of the Equator, and cannot give birth and is constantly as though
just about to.
8 Left to himself he stands in the wide world alone, he has no
contemporaneity to attach himself to, no past he can long for, for his past has
still not arrived, and no future he can hope for, for his future is already past.
Alone, he has the whole world over against him as the ‘Thou’ with which he
finds himself in conflict. For all the rest of the world is to him just one person,
and this person, this inseparable, importunate friend, this is the
misunderstanding. He cannot become old, for he has never been young; he
cannot become young, for he has already become old; in a way he cannot die, for
he has never lived; in a way he cannot live, for he is already dead; he cannot
love, for love is always in the present, and he has no present time, no future, no
past, and yet he is of a sympathetic nature, and he hates the world only because
he loves it; he has no passion, not because he lacks it, but because that same
instant he has the opposite; he has no time for anything, not because his time is
taken up with something else, but because he has no time at all; he is powerless,
not because he lacks strength, but because his own strength makes him impotent.
But soon our hearts are sufficiently steeled, our ears plugged if not closed. We
have listened to the circumspect voice of deliberation; let us now feel the
eloquence of passion – brief, pithy, as all passion is.
A young girl stands there. She complains that her lover has been unfaithful.
This we cannot reflect upon. But she loved him, him alone in all the world, she
loved him with all her soul, with all her heart, and all her mind – she can
remember, then, and sorrow.
Is this a real being or is it an image, a living person who is dying or a dead one
that lives? It is Niobe.
9 She lost everything at a single blow; she lost that to
which she had given life; she lost that which gave her life. Look up to her, dear
Symparanekromenoi; she stands a little higher than the world, as a memorial
stone on a burial mound. But no hope beckons her, no future moves her, no
prospect tempts her, no hope disturbs her – hopeless she stands, petrified in
memory. For one instant she was unhappy, the very same instant she became
happy, and no one can take her good fortune from her; the world changes, but
she knows no fluctuation, and time keeps coming, but for her there is no time to
come.
See yonder, what a beautiful union! The one generation extends its hand to the
next! Is it in blessing, to loyal solidarity, to the joyous dance? It is the outcast
house of Oedipus, and the blow is passed on and crushes the last – it is Antigone.
Yet she is provided for; a generation’s sorrow is enough for a human life. She
has turned her back on hope, she has exchanged its inconstancy for the
allegiance of memory. So be happy, then, dear Antigone! We wish you a long
life, as full of meaning as a deep sigh. May no forgetfulness deprive you of
anything! May the daily bitterness of grief be extended to you in abundance!
A vigorous figure appears, but he is not alone, he has friends, so why does he
come here? It is Job, the patriarch of sorrow – and his friends. He lost
everything, but not at one blow; for the Lord took, and the Lord took, and the
Lord took. Friends taught him to feel the bitterness of the loss; for the Lord gave,
and the Lord gave, and the Lord also gave him a foolish wife into the bargain.
10
He lost everything; for what he kept is beyond our interest. Honour him, dear
Symparanekromenoi, for his grey hair and his misfortune. He lost everything,
but he had possessed it.
His hair is grey, his head bowed, his countenance downcast, his soul troubled.
It is the prodigal son’s father. Like Job, he lost what he cherished most in the
world, yet the Lord did not take it but the enemy; he did not lose it, but he is
losing it; it has not been taken from him, but it is vanishing. He does not sit at
home by the hearth in sackcloth and ashes; he has arisen from his home, he has
forsaken everything to seek what is lost; he snatches at him, but his arm does not
come near him; he calls out to him, but his voice does not reach him. Still he
hopes, if but through tears. He catches sight of him, if but through mists. He
catches up with him, if but in death. His hope makes him aged, and nothing
binds him to the world but the hope which he lives for. His feet are tired, his
eyes dim, his body seeks rest, his hope lives. His hair is white, his body decrepit,
his foot halts, his heart breaks, his hope lives. Raise him up, dear
Symparanekromenoi, he was unhappy.
Who is this pallid figure, listless as the shade of someone dead? His name has
been forgotten, for many centuries have passed since that time. He was a youth,
he had fervour. He sought martyrdom. In imagination he saw himself nailed to
the cross and heaven open; but the reality was too hard for him; the enthusiasm
disappeared, he denied his Master and himself. He wished to carry a world, but
he broke under the strain. His soul was not crushed, or annihilated, it was broken
and his spirit enfeebled, his soul was paralysed. Congratulate him, dear
Symparanekromenoi, he was unhappy. And yet he became happy, he became
what he wanted, a martyr, even if his martyrdom was not, as he had wished, to
be nailed to the cross or thrown to the beasts, but to be burned alive, to be slowly
consumed by a steady fire.
A young woman sits yonder, so thoughtful. Her lover was unfaithful – this we
cannot reflect upon. Young girl, observe the grave countenances of this
assembly; it has heard of more terrible misfortunes, so its venturesome soul
demands greater still. – Yes, but I loved him with all my soul, with all my heart,
with all my mind. – We have heard the like already, do not weary our impatient
longing! After all, you can remember and sorrow. – No, I cannot sorrow, for
perhaps he was not unfaithful, perhaps he was not a deceiver. – Why, then, can
you not sorrow? Come nearer, chosen among girls, forgive the strict censor for
wanting for a moment to reject you. You cannot sorrow. Then why not hope? –
No, I cannot hope, for he was a riddle. – Well, my girl, I understand you, you
stand high on the ladder of unhappiness; look upon her, dear
Symparanekromenoi, she soars almost to the pinnacle of unhappiness. But you
must divide yourself, you must hope by day and sorrow by night, or sorrow by
day and hope by night. Be proud, it is never happiness that should make you
proud, but unhappiness. You are not indeed the unhappiest, but is it not your
opinion, dear Symparanekromenoi, that we award her an honourable accessit?
The grave we cannot award her, but the place next to it.
For there he stands, the emissary from the kingdom of sighs, the elected
favourite of suffering, the apostle of sorrow, the silent friend of pain, the
unhappy lover of memory, confounded in his memory by the light of hope,
deceived in his hope by the shadows of memory. His head is heavy, his knees are
weak, yet he rests on none but himself. He is faint, yet how powerful! His eyes
seem not to have shed, but to have drunk, many tears; yet a fire burns in them
that could consume the entire world, though not one splinter of the sorrow within
his breast. He is bent, yet his youth portends a long life; his lips smile at the
world that misunderstands him. Rise, dear Symparanekromenoi, bow before him,
sorrow’s witnesses, in this solemn hour! I salute you, great unknown, whose
name I do not know; I salute you with your title of honour: The Unhappiest One!
Receive a welcome here in your home from the community of the unhappy;
welcome at the entrance to the humble and low dwelling which is yet prouder
than all the world’s palaces! See, the stone is rolled away, the shade of the grave
waits you with its pleasant coolness. But perhaps the time has not yet come, long
perhaps is the way; but we promise to gather here often to envy you your good
fortune. So accept, then, our wish, a good wish: may no one understand you, but
all envy you; may no friend attach himself to you, no girl love you; may no
secret sympathy suspect your solitary pain; may no eye fathom your distant
sorrow; may no ear detect your secret sigh! Or if your proud soul scorns such
expressions of sympathy, spurns the alleviation, may the girls love you, may
those with child seek you out in their anguish, may mothers put their hopes in
you, may the dying look to you for comfort, may the young attach themselves to
you, may husbands depend upon you, may the aged one reach out to you as to a
staff – may all the world believe you are able to make it happy. So live well,
then, you the unhappiest one! But what am I saying, the unhappiest, I ought to
say the happiest, for this indeed is a gift of fortune that no one can give to
themselves. See, language fails, and thought is confounded; for who is the
happiest except the unhappiest, and who the unhappiest except the happiest?
And what is life but madness, and faith but folly, and hope but reprieve, and love
but salt in the wound?
He vanished, and we stand again before an empty grave. Then let us wish him
peace and rest and recovery, and all possible good fortune, and an early death,
and an eternal oblivion, and no remembrance lest even the memory of him
should make another unhappy.
Rise, dear Symparanekromenoi! The night has passed, the day again begins its
untiring activity, never weary, it seems, of repeating itself for ever and ever.
6 CROP ROTATION
An Attempt at a Theory of Social Prudence
CHREMYLOS: There is too much of everything.
Of love,
KARION: Bread,
CHREMYLOS: Songs,
KARION: And candy.
CHREMYLOS: Of honour,
KARION: Cakes,
CHREMYLOS: Courage,
KARION: And figs.
CHREMYLOS: Of ambition,
KARION: Barley-bread,
CHREMYLOS: High office,
KARION: And pease-porridge.
Cf. Aristophanes, Plutus, vv. 189ff.
PEOPLE of experience maintain that it is very sensible to start from a principle. I
grant them that and start with the principle that all men are boring. Or will
someone be boring enough to contradict me in this? This principle possesses to
the highest degree that power of repulsion one always requires of any negative
that genuinely provides the principle of motion.
1 Not merely is it repellent, it is
infinitely forbidding; and the person with this principle behind him must
necessarily have an infinite momentum to make discoveries with. For if my
principle is true, to slacken or increase one’s impetus one need only consider
with more or less moderation how ruinous boredom is for man; and if one wants
to risk doing injury to the locomotive itself by pressing the speed to the
maximum, one need only say to oneself: ‘Boredom is a root of all evil.’ Strange
that boredom, so still and static, should have such power to set things in motion.
The effect that boredom exercises is altogether magical, except that it is not one
of attraction but of repulsion.
How ruinous boredom is everyone also recognizes in relation to children. So
long as children are enjoying themselves, they are always well-behaved. This
can be said in the strictest sense, since if they sometimes get out of control even
in play, really that is because they are beginning to get bored; boredom has
already set in, though in a different way. So in choosing a nursemaid one pays
attention not just to her sobriety, faithfulness and decency; one also takes into
consideration, aesthetically, her ability to amuse the children. And one would not
hesitate to dismiss a nursemaid lacking in this qualification even if she possessed
all other desirable virtues. Here, indeed, the principle is clearly acknowledged;
but so remarkable are the ways of the world, so much have habit and boredom
gained the upper hand, that justice is done to aesthetics only in the case of the
nursemaid. Were one to demand divorce on the grounds that one’s wife was
boring, or a king’s abdication because he was boring to look at, or a priest
thrown out of the land because he was boring to listen to, or a cabinet minister
dismissed, or a life-sentence for a journalist, because they were dreadfully
boring, it would be impossible to get one’s way. What wonder, then, that the
world is regressing, that evil is gaining ground more and more, since boredom is
on the increase and boredom is a root of all evil.
We can trace this from the very beginning of the world. The gods were bored
so they created man. Adam was bored because he was alone, so Eve was created.
From that time boredom entered the world and grew in exact proportion to the
growth of population. Adam was bored alone, then Adam and Eve were bored in
union, then Adam and Eve and Cain and Abel were bored en famille, then the
population increased and the peoples were bored en masse. To divert themselves
they conceived the idea of building a tower so high it reached the sky. The very
idea is as boring as the tower was high, and a terrible proof of how boredom had
gained the upper hand. Then the nations were scattered over the earth, just as
people now travel abroad, but they continued to be bored. And think of the
consequences of this boredom! Man stood high and fell low, first with Eve and
then the Tower of Babel. Yet what was it that stayed the fall of Rome? It was
panis and circenses.
2 What is it people do nowadays? Do they think of ways of
diverting themselves? Quite the contrary, they accelerate the ruin. They think of
calling a constitutional assembly.
3 Can anything more boring be imagined, as
much for the gentlemen taking part as for those who have to read and hear about
them! There is a proposal to improve the State’s economy through savings. Can
anything more boring be imagined? Instead of increasing the national debt, it is
proposed to pay it off. From what I know of politics, it would be an easy matter
for Denmark to take out a loan of fifteen millions. Why does no one think of
that? That some person is genius enough not to pay his debt, that at least is
something one hears of now and then; why shouldn’t a state be able to do the
same if only all are agreed? So we take out a loan of fifteen millions yet use it
not to pay our debts but for public pleasure. Let us celebrate the thousand-year
reign with joy and merriment. Just as there are boxes everywhere to put money
in, so there should be bowls of money everywhere. Everything would be free,
people would go to the theatre free, have free access to the streetwalkers, take
free drives to the park, be buried free of charge, have someone speak over their
coffin free of charge; for when one always has money in hand everything is in a
sense gratis. No one need own property. An exception would be made just in my
own case. I personally reserve 100 dollars a day permanently in the Bank of
London, partly because I cannot do with less, partly because it was I who came
up with the idea, and finally because one never knows whether I might not come
up with a new idea when the fifteen millions are used up. What would this
affluence lead to? Everything great would pour into Copenhagen, the greatest
artists, actors and dancers. Copenhagen would become another Athens. What
would be the result? Men of wealth would all settle in this city, among them very
likely the Shah of Persia and the King of England. So here is my second idea.
We kidnap the Shah. It may be objected that there would then be rebellion in
Persia, a new Shah would be placed on the throne – it has happened so often
before – and the price for the old Shah would drop. In that case, my idea is we
sell him to the Turks; they will know how to convert him into cash. And then
there is something else our politicians seem entirely to overlook. Denmark holds
the balance of power in Europe. No more fortunate existence can be imagined. I
know it from my own experience. I was once the balance of power in a family
and could do as I pleased; it was never I that suffered, always the others. Oh that
my words might reach your ears, you who sit in high places to advise and rule,
you king’s men and men of the people, wise and understanding citizens of all
classes! Have a care! Old Denmark is foundering, what a sorry fate, and most
fateful of all, it is going under from boredom. In ancient times he who sang the
praises of the dead king most beautifully became the new king.
4
In our time he
should be king who comes up with the best witticism, he the crown prince who
provides the occasion for its utterance.
But how you carry me away, beauteous, sentimental enthusiasm! Is this the
way I should be opening my mouth to address my contemporaries, initiating
them into my wisdom? Not at all. For my wisdom is really not zum für
Jedermann,
5 and it is always more prudent to keep one’s rules of prudence to
oneself. Disciples, then, I have no wish for, but should someone happen to be
present at my deathbed, and if I was sure it was all over with me, I might
perhaps in a fit of philanthropic delirium whisper my teaching in his ear,
uncertain whether I had done him a service or not. There is so much talk of
man’s being a social animal;
6 basically he is a beast of prey, as one can ascertain
not merely by consideration of his teeth. All this talk of sociability and society is
in part, therefore, an inherited hypocrisy, in part a calculated deceit.
So all people are boring. The word itself indicates the possibility of a
subdivision. ‘Boring’ can describe a person who bores others as well as one who
bores himself. Those who bore others are the plebeians, the mass, the endless
train of humanity in general. Those who bore themselves are the elect, the
nobility; and how strange it is that those who don’t bore themselves usually bore
others, while those who do bore themselves amuse others. The people who do
not bore themselves are generally those who are busy in the world in one way or
another, but that is just why they are the most boring, the most insufferable, of
all. This species of animal life, surely, is not the fruit of man’s desire and
woman’s pleasure. Like all lower forms of life, it is distinguished by a high
degree of fertility and multiplies beyond belief. Inconceivable, too, that nature
should need nine months to produce creatures like these which one would rather
suppose could be produced by the score. The other class of men, the select, are
those who bore themselves. As remarked above, generally they amuse others,
outwardly occasionally the mob, in a deeper sense their fellow initiates. The
more profoundly they bore themselves, the more powerful a means of diversion
they offer others, when boredom reaches its zenith, either by dying of boredom
(the passive form) or (the active form) by shooting themselves out of curiosity.
Idleness, it is usually said, is a root of all evil. To prevent this evil one
recommends work. However, it is easy to see from the remedy as well as the
feared cause that this whole view is of very plebeian extraction. Idleness as such
is by no means a root of evil; quite the contrary, it is a truly divine way of life so
long as one is not bored. Certainly, idleness may lead you to lose your fortune,
and so on, but of such things the man of noble nature has no fear; what he fears
is boredom. The Olympian gods were not bored, they prospered in happy
idleness. A beauty who neither sews nor spins nor irons nor reads nor makes
music is happy in her idleness, for she is not bored. So, far from idleness being
the root of evil, rather it is the true good. The root of evil is boredom, and that is
what must be kept at bay. Idleness is not evil; indeed, one can say that any
human who lacks appreciation of it proves he has not raised himself to the level
of humanity. There is a kind of restless activity that keeps a person out of the
world of spirit and puts him in a class with the animals, which from instinct must
always be on the go. There are people with an extraordinary gift for transforming
everything into business, whose whole life is business, who fall in love and
marry, listen to a joke and admire a work of art with the same zealous sense of
affairs with which they work in the office. The Latin proverb, otium est pulvinar
diaboli,
7
is perfectly correct, but when one isn’t bored the devil gets no time to
lay his head on that pillow. Yet in so far as people think it is characteristic of
man to work, idleness and industry are properly opposed to each other. My own
assumption is that it is characteristic of man to amuse himself; my opposites are
therefore no less correct.
Boredom is demonic pantheism. If we remain in it as such it becomes evil; on
the other hand, as soon as it is annulled it is true.
8 But one annuls it only by
amusing oneself – ergo one ought to amuse oneself. Saying work annuls it is to
betray confusion, for though idleness, certainly, can be annulled by industry,
seeing the latter is its opposite, boredom cannot, as one also sees that the busiest
workers of all, those who in their officious buzzing about most resemble
humming insects, are the most boring of all; and if they don’t bore themselves,
that’s because they have no idea what boredom is; but in that case boredom is
not annulled.
Boredom is partly an immediate talent, partly an acquired immediacy. Here the
English are, on the whole, the paradigmatic nation. One seldom encounters a
born talent for indolence, one never meets it in nature; indolence belongs to the
world of spirit. Occasionally you meet an English traveller, however, who is an
incarnation of this talent, a heavy immovable ground-hog whose linguistic
resources are exhausted in a single one-syllable word, an interjection with which
he signifies his greatest admiration and most profound indifference, because in
the unity of boredom admiration and indifference have become
indistinguishable. No other nation but the English produces such natural
curiosities; other nationals are always a little more lively, not so absolutely
stillborn. The only analogy I know is the apostle of empty enthusiasm, who also
journeys through life on an interjection – that is, people who are always making
a profession of enthusiasm, everywhere making their presence felt, and whether
something significant or insignificant is taking place, cry ‘Ah!’ or ‘Oh!’, because
for them the difference between significant and insignificant has become undone
in enthusiasm’s blind and blaring emptiness. The acquired form of boredom is
usually a product of a mistaken attempt at diversion. That the remedy for
boredom can bring boredom about in this way seems doubtful, but it does so
only to the extent that it is incorrectly applied. A misconceived, generally
eccentric form of diversion also has boredom within it, and that is the way it
finds its way out and proves to be the immediate. As with horses one
distinguishes between blind staggers and sleepy staggers, but calls them both
staggers, we can also make a distinction between two kinds of boredom which
are still united in being specifications of boredom.
Pantheism, in general, contains the quality of fullness; with boredom it is the
opposite, it is based on emptiness, but is for that very reason a pantheistic
category.
9 Boredom rests upon the nothingness that winds its way through
existence; its giddiness, like that which comes from gazing down into an infinite
abyss, is infinite. That the eccentric form of diversion mentioned above is based
on boredom can also be seen from the fact that the diversion reverberates
without making an echo, just because in nothing there isn’t even enough to make
an echo possible.
Seeing that boredom is a root of all evil, as enlarged on above, what more
natural than to try to overcome it? But here, as everywhere, cool deliberation is
clearly called for lest in one’s demonic obsession with boredom, in trying to
avoid it one only works oneself further into it. ‘Change’ is what all who are
bored cry out for. With this I am entirely in agreement, only it is important to act
from principle.
My own departure from the general view is adequately expressed in the phrase
‘crop rotation’. This phrase might seem to contain an ambiguity, and in wanting
to make it commodious enough to cover the general method, I should have to
say that the method of rotation consisted in constantly changing the soil. That,
however, is not the sense in which the farmer uses it. Still, I will adopt this use
for a moment, so as to talk of that ‘crop rotation’ which depends on the unlimited
infinity of change, on its extensive dimension.
This rotation is the vulgar, the inartistic method, and is based on an illusion.
One is tired of living in the country, one moves to the city; one is tired of one’s
native land, one travels abroad; one is europamüde,
10 one goes to America, and
so on; finally, one indulges in a dream of endless travel from star to star. Or the
movement is different but still in extension. One is tired of dining off porcelain,
one dines off silver; one tires of that, one dines off gold; one burns half of Rome
to get an idea of the conflagration at Troy. This method defeats itself; it is the
bad infinite.
11 And what did Nero achieve? No, Antonine was wiser; he says, ‘It
is in your power to review your life, to look at things you saw before, from
another point of view.’
12
The method I propose consists not in changing the soil but, as in the real
rotation of crops, in changing the method of cultivation and type of grain. Here,
straightaway, we have the principle of limitation, which is the only saving one in
the world. The more you limit yourself, the more resourceful you become. A
prisoner in solitary confinement for life is most resourceful, a spider can cause
him much amusement. One thinks of one’s schooldays. When one is at the age
when no aesthetic considerations are taken in the choice of one’s teachers and
the latter are for that very reason often very boring, how inventive one is! How
amusing to catch a fly and keep it imprisoned under a nut shell and watch how it
rushes about with the shell! What pleasure one can get by cutting a hole in the
desk to imprison a fly in it, and spy down on it through a piece of paper! How
entertaining it can be to hear the monotonous drip from the roof! How thorough
an observer one becomes, the slightest noise or movement does not escape one!
Here we have the extreme of the principle that seeks relief, not extensively, but
intensively.
The more inventive one can be in changing the mode of cultivation, the better;
but every particular change comes under the general rule of the relation between
remembering and forgetting. The whole of life moves in these two currents, so it
is essential to have control over them. Only when one has thrown hope
overboard is it possible to live artistically; as long as one hopes, one cannot limit
oneself. It is really beautiful to see a man put out to sea with the fair wind of
hope; one can use the opportunity to be taken in tow, but one should never have
it aboard one’s own ship, least of all as a pilot; for hope is a faithless steersman.
Hope was therefore also one of the dubious gifts of Prometheus;
13
instead of the
foreknowledge of the immortals, he gave men hope.
To forget – all men want to do that, and when they come across something
unpleasant they always say, ‘If only I could forget!’ But forgetting is an art that
must be practised beforehand. Being able to forget depends always on how one
remembers, but how one remembers depends in turn on how one experiences
reality. The person who sticks fast in it with the momentum of hope will
remember in a way that makes him unable to forget. Nil admirari
14
is therefore
the real wisdom of life. Every life-situation must possess no more importance
than that one can forget it whenever one wants to; each single life-situation
should have enough importance, however, for one to be able at any time to
remember it. The age that remembers best, but is also the most forgetful, is
childhood. The more poetically one remembers, the more easily one forgets, for
remembering poetically is really just an expression of forgetfulness. In
remembering poetically, what was experienced has already undergone a change
in which it has lost all that was painful. To remember in this way, one must be
careful how one lives, especially how one enjoys. If one enjoys without
reservation to the last, if one always takes with one the most that pleasure can
offer, one will be unable either to remember or to forget. For then one has
nothing else to remember than a surfeit one wants to forget, but which now
plagues you with an involuntary remembrance. So when you begin to notice that
you are being carried away by enjoyment or a life-situation too strongly, stop for
a moment and remember. No other expedient gives a better distaste for going on
too long. One must keep reins on the enjoyment from the beginning, not set all
sail for everything you decide on. One indulges in a certain distrust; only then
can one give the lie to the proverb which says that no one can have his cake and
eat it too. The carrying of secret weapons is forbidden, indeed, by the police, yet
no weapon is as dangerous as the trick of being able to remember. It is a peculiar
feeling when, in the midst of enjoyment, one looks at it in order to remember.
Having perfected the art of forgetting and the art of remembering, one is then
in a position to play battledore and shuttlecock with the whole of existence.
A person’s resilience can really be measured by the power to forget. A person
unable to forget will never amount to much. Whether a Lethe flows somewhere I
do not know,
15 but what I do know is that this art can be developed. Yet it does
not at all consist in the total disappearance of particular impressions; for the art
of forgetting is not the same as forgetfulness. It is also easy to see what very
little understanding people in general have of this art, for usually it is only the
unpleasant they want to forget, not the pleasant. This betrays a complete onesidedness. For forgetting is the proper expression of the real conversion that
reduces experience to a sounding-board. The reason for nature’s greatness is that
it has forgotten that it was once chaos, but this latter thought can recur whenever
need be. Since one usually only conceives of forgetting in relation to what is
unpleasant, one usually conceives it as an untamed power that drowns things out.
Quite the contrary; forgetting is a quiet occupation and ought to be exercised as
much in relation to what is pleasant as to what is unpleasant. As something past,
indeed precisely as past, what is pleasant contains also an unpleasant side by
being able to arouse a sense of privation. This unpleasantness is overcome by
forgetting. The unpleasant has a sting, everyone admits that, and it, too, is
removed by forgetting; but if one pushes the unpleasant aside altogether, as
many of those who dabble in the art of forgetting do, one soon sees what good
that does. In an unguarded moment, it often takes one by surprise with all the
force of the sudden. This is in absolute contradiction to the well-organized
arrangement in a reasonable mind. No misfortune, no hardship, is so hard to
approach, so deaf that it cannot be flattered a little; even Cerberus accepted
honey-cakes, and it is not just young girls one beguiles.
16 One talks it round and
in doing so deprives it of its bite, by no means does one want to forget it; one
forgets it in order to remember it. Yes, even with those memories for which one
might think eternal oblivion was the only remedy, one permits oneself this
cunning, and the deft will succeed in the deception. Forgetting is the shears with
which one clips away what one cannot use – though, mind you, under the overall
supervision of memory. Forgetting and memory are thus identical, and the
skilfully achieved identity is the Archimedean point with which one lifts the
whole world. In saying that we consign something to oblivion, we suggest that it
is simultaneously forgotten yet preserved.
The art of remembering and forgetting will then also prevent one’s sticking fast
in some particular circumstance in life and ensure perfect suspension.
So one must be on one’s guard against friendship. How is a friend defined? A
friend is not what philosophy calls ‘the necessary other’, but the superfluous
third. What are the ceremonies of friendship? One thous and thees in a glass, one
opens an artery, one mixes one’s blood with the friend’s. The exact arrival of this
moment is hard to determine, but it mysteriously proclaims itself, one feels it,
one can no longer use the formal ‘You’ in addressing each other.
17 Once this
feeling has occurred, one can never prove mistaken, as was Gert Westphaler,
who discovered that he had been drinking with the public hangman.
18 – What are
the infallible marks of friendship? Antiquity answers, idem velle, idem nolle, ea
demum firma amicitia,
19 and extremely boringly at that. What significance has
friendship? Mutual assistance in word and deed. So two friends form a close
association in order to be everything for one another, regardless that all the one
can be for the other is in the way. Yes, they may help each other with money, on
and off with each other’s coats, be each other’s humble servant, join in a sincere
New Year’s greeting, likewise in matrimony, birth and burial.
But to abstain from friendship doesn’t mean that you are to live without human
contact. Quite the contrary, human relationships of the kind may also sometimes
take on a deeper surge, except that, although you share the speed of the
movement for a time, you always have enough speed in hand to be able to run
away from it. One no doubt thinks that such behaviour leaves unpleasant
memories, that the unpleasantness consists in the fact that, after having meant
something to you, the relation dwindles away into nothing. But this is a
misunderstanding. Unpleasantness is a piquant ingredient in the contrariety of
life. Besides, the same relationship can acquire significance again in another
way. What one must watch out for is never to stick fast, and for that one must
have one’s forgetting up one’s sleeve. The experienced farmer now and then lets
his land lie fallow; the theory of social prudence recommends the same. All
things, no doubt, will return, but in another way; what has once been taken into
rotation remains there but is varied through the mode of cultivation. It is quite
consistent, therefore, to hope to meet old friends and acquaintances in a better
world; but one does not share the fear of the masses, that they will have changed
too much for one to be able to recognize them again. One fears, rather, that they
may be unchanged. It is incredible how much significance even an insignificant
person can gain through such rational management.
One never enters into marriage. Married couples promise each other eternal
love. That is all very fine but does not mean very much, for when one is finished
with time, one will no doubt be finished with eternity. So if, instead of saying
‘forever’, the parties said, ‘until Easter’, or ‘until the first May-Day’, then at
least their words would have meaning for they would have actually said
something, something they could perhaps keep to. And how does it go with a
marriage? After a little while one party begins to notice that something’s wrong;
then the other party complains and cries out, ‘Faithlessness, faithlessness!’ After
some time the other party arrives at the same point and a state of neutrality is
brought about, in that the mutual faithlessness balances out to the satisfaction
and contentment of both. But now it is too late, for there are great difficulties
connected with divorce.
Such being the case with marriage, it is not surprising that it has to be stiffened
in so many ways with moral supports. When a husband wants to be divorced
from his wife, people cry, ‘He is contemptible, a scoundrel’, etc. How silly, and
what an indirect attack upon marriage! Either marriage has reality in it, in which
case he is sufficiently punished by forfeiting the latter; or it has no reality in it, in
which case it is indeed absurd to abuse him, for he is wiser than others. If a man
grew tired of his money and threw it out of the window, no one would say he
was a contemptible person; for either the money has reality, and then he is
sufficiently punished by depriving himself of it, or it has no reality, and then
indeed he is wise.
One must always be careful not to enter into any life-relation in which one can
become several. For this reason friendship is already dangerous, even more so
marriage. A married couple are indeed said to become one, but this is a very dark
and mysterious saying. When you are several you have lost your freedom and
cannot order travelling boots when you will, cannot roam aimlessly about. If you
have a wife it is difficult; if you have a wife and may have children, it is
troublesome; if you have a wife and do have children, it is impossible. We do,
indeed, have the example of a gypsy woman carrying her husband on her back
through life,
20 but for one thing it is a rare occurrence, and for another, in the
long run wearisome – for the husband. Besides, in marriage one falls into
extremely fateful line with practice and custom, and, like wind and weather,
practice and custom are very hard to pin down. In Japan, I am told, it is practice
and custom for the husbands too to he in childbed. Why shouldn’t the time come
when Europe introduces the customs of foreign countries?
Friendship is already dangerous, marriage still more so, for the woman is and
will remain the husband’s ruin as soon as he enters into a permanent relation
with her. Take a young man, ardent as an Arabian horse, let him marry, he is lost.
First of all the woman is proud, then she is weak, then she faints, then he faints,
then the whole family faints. A woman’s love is only dissimulation and
weakness.
But not entering into marriage need not mean that one’s life lacks eroticism.
The erotic should also have infinitude, but poetic infinitude, which can just as
well be limited to an hour as to a month. When two people fall in love and
suspect they are made for each other, the thing is to have the courage to break it
off, for by continuing they only have everything to lose and nothing to gain. It
seems a paradox and is so, for feeling, not for understanding. In this domain it is
especially important to be able to use moods; if one can do that, then one can
bring off an inexhaustible variety of combinations.
One never accepts any vocational responsibility. If one does so, one simply
becomes Mr Anybody, a tiny little pivot in the machinery of the corporate state;
you cease to direct your own affairs, and then theories can be of little help. One
acquires a title, and in it is contained all the consistency of sin and evil. The law
one is then in thrall to is equally boring, whether promotion is rapid or slow. A
title is something one can never be rid of again, it would have to be lost through
some crime which incurs a public whipping, and even then you are not certain,
for you may be pardoned and have your title restored to you by royal decree.
Though one abstains from vocational responsibility, one should not be inactive
but stress all occupation that is identical with idleness; one must engage in all
kinds of breadless skills. Yet in this connection one should develop oneself not
so much extensively as intensively, and in spite of being on in years, prove the
truth of the old proverb that it takes little to please a child.
If, then, in accordance with the theory of social prudence, one to some extent
varies the soil – for if one were to live only in relation to one person the rotation
method would turn out as badly as if a farmer had only one acre of land, the
result of which would be to make it impossible for him to let land lie fallow,
which is of the utmost importance – then one must also constantly vary oneself,
and this is really the secret. To that end one must necessarily have control of
moods. Controlling them in the sense of being able to produce them at will is
impossible, but prudence teaches how to make use of the instant. As an
experienced sailor always looks out searchingly over the water and sees a squall
far ahead, so should one always see the mood a little in advance. One must know
how the mood affects oneself, and in all probability others, before putting it on.
One strokes the strings first to elicit pure tones and see what there is in a person,
and the intermediate tones follow later. The more practice you have, the more
readily you will be convinced that often there is much in a person which one
never considers. When sensitive people, who as such are extremely boring,
become angry, they are often very diverting. Teasing in particular is an excellent
means of exploration.
The whole secret lies in arbitrariness. People think it requires no skill to be
arbitrary, yet it requires deep study to succeed in being arbitrary without losing
oneself in it, to derive satisfaction from it oneself. One’s enjoyment is not
immediate but is something quite different which one arbitrarily injects. You see
the middle of a play, read the third part of a book. In this way one derives a quite
different enjoyment from the one the author has been so good as to intend for
you. One enjoys something entirely accidental, one regards the whole of
existence from this standpoint, lets its reality run aground on it. I will give an
example. There was someone whose chatter certain circumstances made it
necessary for me to listen to. He was ready at every opportunity with a little
philosophical lecture which was utterly boring. Driven almost to despair, I
discovered suddenly that he perspired unusually profusely when he spoke. I saw
how the pearls of sweat gathered on his brow, then joined in a stream, slid down
his nose, and ended hanging in a drop at the extreme tip of it. From that moment
everything was changed; I could even take pleasure in inciting him to begin his
philosophical instruction, just to observe the sweat on his brow and on his nose.
Baggesen says somewhere of a man that he was no doubt a very decent person,
but that he had one objection to make to him: nothing rhymed with his name.
21
It
is extremely beneficial to let the realities of life neutralize themselves in this way
on an arbitrary interest of this kind. You transform something accidental into the
absolute and, as such, into an object of absolute admiration. This works
particularly excellently when tempers are aroused. For many people this method
is an excellent stimulus. One looks at everything in life as a wager, and so on.
The more consistently one can sustain the arbitrariness, the more amusing the
combinations. The degree of consistency always shows whether one is an artist
or a dabbler, for to some extent people all do the same. The eye with which one
looks at reality must constantly change. The Neo-Platonists supposed that those
human beings who had been less perfect on earth became, after death, more or
less perfect animals, depending on their deserts. Those, for example, who had
exercised civic virtues on a smaller scale (retail traders) became civic animals,
bees for example. Such a view of life, which sees all persons transformed into
animals or plants (Plotinus also thought that some were transformed into plants),
offers a rich multiplicity of variations. The painter Tischbein has tried to idealize
every human being as an animal. His method has the fault of being too serious,
and that it seeks a real resemblance.
22
To the arbitrariness within oneself there corresponds the accidental outside
one. One should therefore always keep an eye open for the accidental, always be
expeditus
23
if anything should offer. The so-called social pleasures, for which
one prepares eight or fourteen days in advance, have no great interest. Through
accident, on the other hand, even the least significant thing can become a rich
source of amusement. It is impossible here to go into detail, no theory can stretch
that far. Even the most comprehensive theory is still but poverty compared with
what, in his ubiquity, the genius easily comes by.
7 THE SEDUCER’S DIARY
Sua passion’ predominante
È la giovin principiànte.
Don Giovanni, Act I
1
I CANNOT conceal from myself, can scarcely master, the anxiety which grips me at
this moment, as I resolve for my own interest to make a fair copy of the hasty
transcript I was able at that time to secure only in the greatest haste and with
much disquiet. The situation confronts me just as alarmingly, but also just as
reproachfully, as it did then. Contrary to his custom, he had not closed his
escritoire, so its whole contents lay at my disposal; but it is futile for me to gloss
over my behaviour by reminding myself that I did not open any drawer. One
drawer was pulled out. In it I found a pile of loose papers and on top of them lay
a book in broad quarto, tastefully bound. On the side facing up was a vignette of
white paper on which he had written in his own hand ‘Commentarius perpetuus
No. 4’.
2
In vain have I tried, however, to make myself believe that had that side
of the book not been turned up, and had the strange title not tempted me, I
should not have succumbed to the temptation, or at least would have attempted
to resist it. The title itself was curious, not so much in itself as because of its
setting. From a quick glance at the loose papers I saw that these contained
constructions of erotic situations, some hints about some relationship or other,
sketches of letters of a quite peculiar character, with which I later became
familiar in their artistically consummate, calculated carelessness. When now,
having seen through the designing mind of this depraved person, I recall my
situation; when, with an eye open for every artifice, I approach that drawer in
thought, it makes the same impression upon me as it must make upon a police
officer when he enters the room of a forger, opens his repositories and finds in a
drawer a pile of loose papers, handwriting samples; on one there is part of a
foliage motif, on another a signature, on a third a line of reversed writing. It
shows him clearly that he is on the right track, and his joy over this is mingled
with a certain admiration for the study and industry here clearly in evidence.
For me it might have been a little different, being less used to tracking down
criminals and not armed with, well, a police badge. The fact that I was following
unlawful paths would have been an additional weight on my mind. On this
occasion, as usually happens, I was no less at a loss for thoughts than for words.
An impression remains with one until reflection reasserts itself and, diverse and
speedy in its movements, ingratiates itself with the unfamiliar stranger and talks
him round. The more reflection develops, the quicker it can pull itself together;
like a passport clerk for foreign travellers, it becomes so used to seeing the most
fantastic figures that it is not easily taken aback. But however strongly
developed my own reflection, I was at first still greatly astonished. I remember
very well that I turned pale, that I nearly fell over, and how that fact alarmed me.
What if he had come home, had found me in a faint with the drawer in my hand?
At least a bad conscience can make life interesting.
The title of the book in itself made no particular impression on me; I thought it
was a collection of excerpts, which to me seemed quite natural since I knew that
he had always embraced his studies with enthusiasm. Its contents, however, were
of quite another kind. It was neither more nor less than a diary, painstakingly
kept; and just as I did not think, from what I knew of him before, that his life
was in such great need of commentary, so I do not deny, after the insight I had
now gained, that the title had been chosen with much taste and understanding,
with true aesthetic, objective mastery of himself and the situation. The title is in
perfect harmony with the entire contents. His life has been an attempt to realize
the task of living poetically. With a keenly developed sense for what is
interesting in life, he had known how to find it, and having found it he had
constantly reproduced the experience in a semi-poetic way. His diary, therefore,
was not historically exact or a straightforward narrative, not indicative, but
subjunctive. Although of course the experience was recorded after it happened –
sometimes perhaps even a considerable time after – it was often described as if
taking place at the very moment, so dramatically vivid that sometimes it was as
though it was all taking place before one’s very eyes. But that he should have
done this because the diary served any ulterior purpose is highly improbable; it
is quite obvious that, in the strictest sense, its only importance was for him
personally. And to assume that what I have before me is a literary work, perhaps
even intended for publication, is precluded by the whole as well as by the details.
Certainly he did not need to fear anything personally in publishing it, for most of
the names are so unusual that there is altogether no likelihood of their being
authentic. But I have formed a suspicion that the Christian name is historically
correct, so that he himself would always be sure of identifying the actual person,
while every outsider must be misled by the surname. Such at least is the case
with the girl I knew, around whom the chief interest centres, Cordelia – that was
her correct name; not, however, Wahl.
How, then, can we explain that the diary has nevertheless acquired such a
poetic flavour? The answer is not difficult; it can be explained by his poetic
temperament, which is, if you will, not rich, or if you prefer, not poor enough to
distinguish poetry and reality from each other. The poetic was the extra he
himself brought with him. This extra was the poetical element he enjoyed in the
poetic situation provided by reality; this element he took back in again in the
form of poetic reflection. That was the second enjoyment, and enjoyment was
what his whole life was organized around. In the first case he savoured the
aesthetic element personally; in the second he savoured his own person
aesthetically. In the first case the point was that he egoistically, personally,
savoured what in part reality gave him and what in part he himself had
impregnated reality with; in the second case his personality was volatilized and
he savoured, then, the situation and himself in the situation. In the first case he
was in constant need of reality as the occasion, as an element; in the second case
reality was drowned in the poetic. The fruit of the first stage is thus the mood
from which the diary results as the fruit of the second stage, the word ‘fruit’
being used in the latter case in a somewhat different sense from that in the first.
The poetic is thus something he has constantly possessed by virtue of the
ambiguity in which his life passed.
Behind the world we live in, in the distant background, lies another world
standing in roughly the same relation to the former as the stage one sometimes
sees in the theatre behind the real stage stands to the latter. Through a thin gauze
one sees what looks like a world of gossamer, lighter, more ethereal, of a
different quality from the real world. Many people who appear bodily in the real
world do not belong there but to this other world. Yet the fact that someone fades
away in this manner, indeed almost disappears from reality, can be due to either
health or sickness. The latter was the case with this person, with whom I was
once acquainted but without getting to know him. He did not belong to reality
yet had much to do with it. He was constantly running around in it, yet even
when he devoted himself to it most, he was already beyond it. But it was not the
good that beckoned him away, nor was it really evil – even now I dare not say
that of him. He has suffered from an exacerbatio cerebri
3
for which reality
afforded insufficient incitement, at best only temporarily. Reality was not too
much for him, he was not too weak to bear its burden; no, he was too strong, but
this strength was a sickness. As soon as reality lost its power to incite he was
disarmed; that is where the evil in him lay. He was conscious of this, even at the
moment of incitement, and it was in his consciousness of this the evil lay.
I once knew the girl whose story forms the substance of the diary. Whether he
has seduced others I do not know; it does seem so from his papers. He seems
also to have been adept at another kind of practice, wholly characteristic of him;
for he was of far too spiritual a nature to be a seducer in the usual sense. From
the diary we also learn that at times his desire was for something altogether
arbitrary – a greeting, for instance – and under no circumstance would accept
more, because in the person in question this was what was most beautiful. With
the help of his mental gifts he knew how to tempt a girl, to draw her to him,
without caring to possess her in any stricter sense. I can imagine him able to
bring a girl to the point where he was sure she would sacrifice all, but when
matters had come that far he left off without the slightest advance having been
made on his part, and without a word having been let fall of love, let alone a
declaration, a promise. Yet it would have happened, and the unhappy girl would
retain the consciousness of it with double bitterness, because there was not the
slightest thing she could appeal to. She could only be constantly tossed about by
the most divergent moods in a terrible witches’ dance, at one moment
reproaching herself, forgiving him, at another reproaching him, and then, since
the relationship would only have been actual in a figurative sense, she would
constantly have to contend with the doubt that the whole thing might only have
been imagination. She would be unable to confide in anyone, for really there was
nothing to confide. When you have dreamed, you can tell others your dream, but
what she had to tell was no dream, it was reality, and yet, as soon as she wanted
to speak of it to another to ease her troubled mind, it was nothing. She herself
felt this very keenly. No one could grasp it, hardly even herself, and yet it lay
with an unsettling weight upon her.
Such victims were therefore of a quite special nature. They were not
unfortunate girls who, social outcasts or thinking themselves such, openly fumed
and fretted and now and then, when their hearts became too full, gave vent in
hate or forgiveness. No visible change occurred in them; they lived in their
normal circumstances, as respected as ever, and yet they were changed, wellnigh inexplicably to themselves, incomprehensibly to others. Their lives were
not, as with those others, snapped off or broken, they were bent in on
themselves; lost to others, they sought vainly to find themselves. Just as you
might say that your path through life left no trace (for your feet were so formed
as to leave no footprints – this is how I best picture to myself his infinite selfreflection), so it could be said that no victim fell to him. He lived in far too
spiritual a manner to be a seducer in the ordinary sense. Sometimes, however, he
assumed a parastatic body and was then sheer sensuality.
4 Even his affair with
Cordelia was so complicated that it was possible for him to appear as the one
seduced; yes, even the unlucky girl was sometimes in confusion about it; here,
too, his footprints are so indistinct that any proof is impossible. The individuals
were merely his incitement; he cast them off as a tree sheds its leaves – he is
refreshed, the leaf withers.
But how, I wonder, do things look in his own head? Just as he has led others
astray, so in my view he ends by going astray himself. It is not in external
respects that he has led the others astray, but in ways that affect them inwardly.
There is something outrageous in a person’s misdirecting a traveller who has lost
his way and then leaving him to himself in his error, yet what is that compared
with causing someone to go astray in himself? The lost traveller, after all, has a
consolation that the country around him is constantly changing, and with every
change is born a new hope of finding a way out. A person who goes astray
inwardly has less room, for manoeuvre; he soon finds he is going round in a
circle from which he cannot escape. This, on an even more terrible scale, I think,
is how it will go with him. I can imagine nothing more agonizing than an
intriguing mind which has lost the thread and then turns all its wits upon itself,
as conscience awakens and the question is one of extricating oneself from this
confusion. It is to no avail that he has many exits from his fox’s earth; the
moment his anxious soul thinks it sees daylight appearing, it proves to be a new
entrance, and like startled game, pursued by despair, he is thus constantly
seeking an exit and forever finding an entrance through which he returns into
himself. Such a man is not always what we could call a criminal; often he
himself is deluded by his intrigues, and yet he is overtaken by a more terrible
punishment than the criminal, for what is the pain even of remorse compared
with this conscious madness? His punishment has a purely aesthetic character,
for even to talk of his conscience awakening is to apply too ethical an expression
to him. For him conscience takes the form simply of a higher level of
consciousness which expresses itself in a disquietude that still fails to accuse him
in a deeper sense, but which keeps him awake with no support beneath him in
his barren restlessness. Nor is he mad; for in their diversity his finite thoughts
are not petrified in the eternity of madness.
Poor Cordelia! For her, too, it will be hard to find peace. She forgives him
from the bottom of her heart, but she finds no rest, for then doubt awakens: it
was she who broke off the engagement, it was she who caused the disaster, it
was her pride that yearned for the uncommon. Then she repents, but she finds no
rest, for then the accusing thoughts acquit her: it was he with his artfulness who
placed this plan in her mind. Then she turns to hatred, her heart finds relief in
curses, but she finds no rest; she reproaches herself again, reproaches herself
because she has hated, she who is herself a sinner, reproaches herself because,
however sly he may have been, she will still always be guilty. It is grievous for
her that he has deceived her; it is even more grievous, one could almost be
tempted to say, that he has aroused in her this many-tongued reflection, that he
has developed her aesthetically enough no longer to listen humbly to one voice,
but to be able to hear these many points of view all at once. Then memory
awakens with her soul, she forgets the offence and the guilt, she remembers the
beautiful moments, and she is numbed in an unnatural exaltation. In such
moments she not only remembers him, she understands him with a clairvoyance
which only goes to show how far she has travelled. Then she no longer sees the
criminal in him, or the noble person; her sense of him is purely aesthetic. She
once wrote me a note in which she expressed her feelings about him.
‘Sometimes he was so spiritual that I felt myself annihilated as a woman, at
other times so wild and passionate, so filled with desire, that I almost trembled
before him. Sometimes I seemed a stranger to him, at other times he gave of
himself completely; when I then flung my arms around him, sometimes
everything was suddenly changed and I embraced a cloud.
5
I knew that
expression before I knew him, but he has taught me what it means; when I use it
I always think of him, just as every thought I think is only in connection with
him. I have always loved music and he was a matchless instrument; always
alive, he had a range that no instrument has, he was the epitome of all feelings
and moods, no thought was too elevated for him, none too despairing, he could
roar like an autumn storm, he could whisper inaudibly. No word of mine was
without effect, and yet I cannot say that my word did not fail of its effect, for it
was impossible for me to know what effect it would have. With an indescribable
but secret, blessed, unnameable anxiety I listened to this music I myself called
forth, yet did not call forth; there was always harmony, he always carried me
away.’
Terrible for her, it will be more terrible for him; I can infer this from the fact
that even I cannot quite control the anxiety that grips me every time I think of
the matter. I, too, am carried along into that nebulous realm, that dream world
where every moment one is afraid of one’s own shadow. Often I try in vain to
tear myself away, I follow as a figure of menace, as an accuser who cannot
speak. How strange! He has spread the deepest secrecy over everything, and still
there is a deeper secret, and it is this, that I am in on it; and indeed I have myself
become privy to it unlawfully. To forget the whole thing would be impossible. I
have sometimes thought of speaking about it to him. Still, how would that help?
He would disavow everything, maintain that the diary was a literary effort, or
impose silence upon me, something I could not deny him considering how I
came to know of it. Nothing, after all, is so pervaded by seduction and
damnation as a secret.
I have received from Cordelia a collection of letters. Whether these are all of
them I do not know, although it occurs to me she once let it be understood that
she herself had confiscated some. I have copied them and will now insert them
in my own clean copy. It is true the dates are missing, but even if they were there
it would not help much, since the diary as it proceeds becomes more and more
sparing. Indeed, in the end, with the odd exception, it gives no dates, as though
the story as it progressed acquired such qualitative importance, and in spite of
being historically real, came so near to being idea, that time specifications
became for this reason a matter of indifference. What did help me, however, was
the fact that at various places in the diary are some words whose significance at
first I did not grasp. But by comparing them with the letters I realized that they
furnish the motives for the latter. It will therefore be a simple matter to insert
them in the right places, inasmuch as I shall always introduce the letter at the
point where its motive is indicated. Had I not found these clues, I would have
incurred a misunderstanding; for no doubt it would not have occurred to me, as
now from the diary seems probable, that at times the letters followed upon each
other with such frequency that she seems to have received several in one day.
Had I followed my original intention I should have apportioned them more
evenly, and not suspected the effect he obtained through the passionate energy
with which he used this, like all other means, to keep Cordelia on the pinnacle of
passion.
Apart from complete information on his relationship to Cordelia, the diary also
contained, interspersed here and there, several small descriptions. Wherever
these were found there was an ‘NB’ in the margin. These depictions have
absolutely nothing to do with Cordelia’s story but have given me a vivid
conception of what is meant by an expression he often used, though previously I
understood it differently: ‘One ought always to have an extra little line out.’ Had
an earlier volume of this diary fallen into my hands, I should probably have
come across more of these, which somewhere in the margin he calls ‘actions at a
distance’;
6
for he himself admits that Cordelia occupied him too much for him
really to have time to look about.
Shortly after he had abandoned Cordelia, he received some letters from her
which he returned unopened. These were among the letters Cordelia turned over
to me. She had herself broken the seal, and so there seems no reason why I
should not venture to make a transcript. She has never mentioned their content to
me; on the other hand, when she referred to her relationship to Johannes she
usually recited a little verse, I believe by Goethe, which seemed to convey a
different meaning according to her moods and the difference in delivery these
occasioned:
Gehe
Verschmähe
Die Treue,
Die Rene
Kommt nach.
7
These letters go as follows:
Johannes!
I do not call you ‘mine’, I realize very well you never have been, and I am
punished enough by this thought having once gladdened my soul; and yet I do
call you ‘mine’: my seducer, my deceiver, my foe, my murderer, source of my
unhappiness, grave of my joy, abyss of my ruin. I call you ‘mine’, and call
myself ‘yours’; and as it once flattered your ear, which proudly bent down to my
adoration, so shall it now sound like a curse upon you, a curse to all eternity.
Don’t expect me to pursue you, or to arm myself with a dagger so as to incite
your ridicule! Flee where you will, I am still yours; go to the farthest boundaries
of the world, I am still yours; love a hundred others, I am still yours; yes, even in
the hour of death I am yours. The very language I use against you must prove I
am yours. You have presumed so to deceive a human being that you have
become everything to me; so now will I place all my pleasure in being your
slave – yours, yours, yours is what I am, your curse.
Your Cordelia
Johannes!
There was a rich man who had many cattle, large and small; there was a poor
little girl, she had only a single lamb, which ate from her hand and drank from
her cup.
8 You were the rich man, rich in all the earth’s splendour, I was the poor
girl who owned only my love. You took it, you rejoiced in it; then desire
beckoned to you and you sacrificed the little I owned; of your own you could
sacrifice nothing. There was a rich man who owned many cattle, large and small;
there was a poor little girl who had only her love.
Your Cordelia
Johannes!
Is there no hope at all, then? Will your love never reawaken? I know you have
loved me, even if I do not know what makes me sure of that. I will wait,
however heavy time hangs, I will wait, wait until you are weary of loving others;
your love will then rise up again from its grave, I will love you as always, thank
you as always, as before, oh Johannes, as before! Johannes! This cold-hearted
callousness against me, is it your true nature? Was your love, your ample heart
just a lie and a falsehood? Are you now yourself again, then? Be patient with my
love, forgive me for continuing to love you; I know my love is a burden to you,
but there will be a time when you return to your Cordelia. Your Cordelia! Hear
that entreaty! Your Cordelia, your Cordelia.
Your Cordelia
If Cordelia did not possess the compass she admired in her Johannes, one still
sees clearly that she was not without modal variation. Each of her letters clearly
bears the stamp of her mood, even though to some extent she lacked lucidity in
her presentation. This is especially the case in the second letter, where one
suspects rather than grasps her meaning, but to me it is this imperfection that
makes it so touching.
April 4th
Caution, my beautiful unknown! Caution! Stepping out of a coach is not so
simple a matter. Sometimes it is a decisive step. I might lend you a short story by
Tieck in which you would see how a lady, on dismounting from her horse, got so
caught up in a tangle that this step became decisive for her whole life.
9 Also, the
steps on coaches are usually so badly placed that one has almost to forget about
being graceful and risk a desperate lunge into the arms of coachman and
footman. Yes, coachman and footman have the best of it! I really think I shall
seek employment as a footman in a house where there are young girls; a servant
easily becomes privy to the secrets of a little girl like that. But for God’s sake,
don’t jump, I beg you! After all, it’s dark; I shan’t disturb you; I shall just place
myself under this street-lamp so you can’t see me, and one is always only
bashful, after all, to the extent one is seen, but then again, one is always only
seen to the extent one sees. So for the sake of the footman who may not be able
to withstand such a leap, for the sake of the silk dress, likewise the lace edging,
for my sake, let this charming little foot, whose slenderness I have already
admired, let it venture out into the world, dare to depend on it, it will surely find
a footing, and should you tremble an instant because it seems as though it sought
in vain for something to rest upon, yes, should you tremble even after it has
found it, then quickly bring the other foot too, for who would be so cruel as to
leave you in that position, who so ungracious, so slow to keep up with the
revelation of beauty? Or is it, again, some intruder you fear? Hardly the servant,
or me, for I have already seen the little foot, and since I am a natural scientist I
have learned from Cuvier
10 how to draw definite conclusions from such details.
Hurry then! How this anxiety enhances your beauty! Still, anxiety in itself is not
beautiful; it is so only when one sees at the same time the energy that overcomes
it. How firmly, now, this little foot stands. I have noticed that girls with small
feet generally stand more firmly than the more pedestrian, large-footed ones. –
Now who would have thought it? It flies in the face of all experience, one runs
not nearly so great a risk of one’s dress being caught up when climbing out as
when one jumps out. But then it is always risky for young girls to ride in a
coach, in the end they come to stay there. The lace and the ribbons are lost and
that’s the end of that. No one has seen anything; to be sure a dark figure appears,
wrapped to the eyes in a cloak. One cannot see where he has come from, the
light shines right in one’s eyes; he passes you by in a moment, when you are
about to enter the street-door. Just at the critical second, a sidelong glance seizes
upon its object. You blush, your bosom becomes too full to be able to lighten
itself in a single breath; there is exasperation in your glance, a proud contempt;
there is a prayer, a tear in your eye; both are equally beautiful, I accept both
equally as my due, for I can be just as well the one thing as the other. But I’m
mischievous all the same – what is the number of the house? What do I see? A
window-display of trinkets; my beautiful unknown, perhaps it is outrageous of
me, but I follow the path of light … She has forgotten what has passed. Ah, yes,
when one is seventeen, when one goes shopping at that happy age, when the
thought of every large or small object one lays one’s hand on gives an
inexpressible joy, one forgets easily. She still hasn’t seen me. I am standing by
myself, far away on the other side of the counter. A mirror hangs on the wall
opposite. She doesn’t think of it, but it thinks of her. How true to her image it is,
as a humble slave who shows his devotion by being faithful, a slave who,
although she means something to him, means nothing to her, who although he
dares to grasp her, does not dare to comprehend her. That unhappy mirror, which
can capture her image but not her; that unhappy mirror, which cannot hide her
image in its secret depths, hide it from the whole world, but must on the contrary
betray it to others, as now to me. What agony if a man were so made. And yet
aren’t there many who are made thus, who own nothing except in the instant
when they show it to others, who grasp the surface only, not the substance, who
lose everything when the substance itself wants to appear, as this mirror would
lose her image if she were, with a single breath, to betray her heart to it? And if a
man could not possess a memory image even at the moment of presence, he
would always want to be at a distance from the beauty, not too near for the
earthly eye to see how beautiful is that which he holds in his close embrace and
is lost to the outward eye, though he can always regain it by putting it at a
distance, but which he can then also have before him in his mind’s eye when he
cannot see the object itself because it is too near, when lips are closed on lips…
Yet, how beautiful she is! Poor mirror, it must be agony! It is well that you know
no jealousy. Her head is a perfect oval; she inclines it a little forward, thus
heightening her forehead, which rises pure and proud without any phrenologist’s
signs of intellect. Her dark hair closes softly and gently about her brow. Her face
is like a fruit, every transition fully rounded. Her skin is transparent, like velvet
to the touch, I can feel it with my eyes. Her eyes – well, yes, I haven’t seen them
yet, they are hidden behind lids armed with silken fringes curving like hooks,
dangerous to whoever would meet her glance. She has a Madonna head, pure
and innocent in cast; and like the Madonna she is bending forward, but she is not
lost in contemplation of the One. There is a variation of expression in her face.
What she is considering is the manifold, the multiplicity of things over which
worldly pomp and splendour casts its reflection. She pulls off her glove to show
the mirror and myself a right hand, white and shapely as an antique, without
adornment, not even a flat gold ring on her fourth finger – Bravo! She looks up,
and how changed everything is, yet the same, the forehead a little less high, the
oval of her face a little less regular but more alive. She is talking with the
salesman, she is cheerful, joyful, talkative. She has already chosen one, two,
three things; she picks up a fourth and holds it in her hand, again she looks
down; she asks what it costs; she puts it to one side under her glove, it must
surely be a secret, intended for – a sweetheart? But then she is not engaged.
Alas, there are many who are not engaged and yet have a sweetheart, many who
are engaged and still have no sweetheart … Ought I to give her up? Ought I to
leave her undisturbed in her joy? … She wants to pay, but she has lost her purse
… presumably she mentions her address, I don’t want to hear that, I don’t want
to deprive myself of the surprise; I shall no doubt meet her again in life, I shall
recognize her, and maybe she will also recognize me, my sidelong glance is not
so easily forgotten. When I meet her by surprise in unexpected surroundings,
that’s when her turn will come. If she does not recognize me, if her glance does
not immediately convince me of that, then I can always get a chance to see her
from the side. I promise she shall remember the situation. No impatience, no
greediness, everything will be savoured in slow draughts; she is earmarked and
she will no doubt be brought in.
the 5th
I rather like that! Alone in the evening on Østergade. Yes, all right, I can see
the footman following you; don’t suppose I think so ill of you that you would go
out all alone; don’t think I am so inexperienced that in my survey of the situation
I have not observed that demure figure straightaway. But why in such a hurry?
One is a little anxious after all; one feels a pounding of the heart, due not to an
impatient longing to get home, but to an impatient fear which courses through
one’s entire body with its sweet unrest, and hence the rapid tempo of the feet. –
But still it is gorgeous, priceless to walk alone like this – with the footman
behind … ‘One is sixteen years old, one has read, that is to say, read romances.
While happening to pass through one’s brothers’ room one has picked up a piece
of a conversation between them and their friends, something about Østergade.
Later one has whisked through on several occasions to obtain a little more
information if possible. To no avail! As a big, grown-up girl, shouldn’t one know
something about the world? If only it were possible to go out without the servant
behind. Thanks, no! Mother and father would make peculiar faces, and also,
what excuse could one give? There’s no chance of it when one is going to a
party, it would be a little too early; I heard August say nine to ten o’clock. Going
home it’s too late, and then usually you must have an escort to drag along.
Thursday evening, on the way back from the theatre, would be a splendid
opportunity, but then one always has to drive in the coach and have Mrs
Thomsen and her dear cousins packed in too; if one drove alone, one could let
down the window and look about a bit. Still, the unexpected often occurs. Today
mother said to me, “You’ll never get that sewing finished for your father’s
birthday; to be quite undisturbed, you may go to your Aunt Jette’s and stay until
tea-time, then Jens can fetch you!” Really it wasn’t such a very pleasing
message, since it is extremely boring at Aunt Jette’s; but then I will walk home
alone at nine with the servant. When Jens comes, he will have to wait until a
quarter to ten, and then off we go. Only I may meet my Mr Broder or Mr August
– that mightn’t be such a good idea, presumably I’d be escorted home – thanks,
but I prefer to be free, freedom – but if I could catch sight of them so that they
didn’t see me’ … Now then, my little lady, what is it you see, and what do you
think I see? In the first place, the little cap you have on suits you splendidly, and
harmonizes totally with your hurrying. It is not a hat, nor is it a bonnet, more like
a kind of hood. But you can’t possibly have had that on when you went out this
morning. Could the servant have brought it, or have you borrowed it from Aunt
Jette? – Maybe you are incognito. One shouldn’t lower the veil completely if one
is to make observations. Or perhaps it isn’t a veil but just a broad piece of lace?
In the dark it is impossible to decide. Whatever it is, it hides the upper part of the
face. The chin is really pretty, a little too pointed; the mouth small, open; that’s
because you are walking too energetically. The teeth – white as snow. That’s
how it should be. Teeth are of the greatest importance, they are a lifeguard
hiding behind the seductive softness of the lips. The cheeks glow with health. –
If one inclines one’s head a little to the side it might be possible to catch a
glimpse under the veil or lace. Watch out! A look like that from below is more
dangerous than one from straight ahead. It’s like fencing, and what weapon so
sharp, so sudden in its movement, and hence so deceptive, as the eye? One
points high quart, as the fencer says, and thrusts in second; the quicker the thrust
follows the pointing the better. The moment of targetting is an indescribable
now. The opponent feels as though slashed, yes, indeed he is struck, but in quite
a different place than he thought … indefatigably, on she goes without fear and
without harm. Watch out! There’s a man coming over there; lower the veil, don’t
let his profane glance defile you. You’ve no idea – it might be impossible for you
to forget for a long time the disgusting dread with which it touched you. – You
do not notice, as I did, that he has sized up the situation. – The servant has been
picked out as the nearest object. Yes, now you see the consequences of going out
alone with a servant. The servant has fallen down. Really, it’s quite laughable,
but what will you do now? Going back and helping him to his feet is impossible,
to go on with a mud-stained servant is disagreeable, to go alone is risky. Watch
out! the monster approaches … You don’t answer me. Just look at me, is there
anything in my appearance that frightens you? I make no impression at all on
you, I look like a good-natured person from quite another world. There is
nothing in my speech to disturb you, nothing to remind you of the situation, no
slightest movement of mine that comes too near you. You are still a little
anxious; you still haven’t forgotten that sinister figure’s approach. You conceive
a certain kindness towards me, the awkwardness that keeps me from looking at
you gives you the upper hand. That pleases you and makes you feel safe. You
might almost be tempted to poke a little fun at me. I wager that at this moment
you would have the courage to take me by the arm, if it occurred to you … So
it’s in Stormgade you live. You drop me a cold and hasty curtsy. Have I deserved
that, I who have helped you out of the whole unpleasantness? You are sorry, you
return, you thank me for my civility, offer me your hand – why do you turn pale?
Isn’t my voice unchanged, my bearing the same, my eye as quiet and calm? This
handclasp? Can a handclasp mean anything? Yes, much, very much, my little
miss. Within a fortnight I shall explain everything to you; until then you must
remain in the contradiction: I am a good-natured person who came like a knight
to the aid of a young girl, and I can also press your hand in a way that is
anything but good-natured. –
April 7th
‘On Monday, then, one o’clock at the exhibition.’ Very good, I shall have the
honour of turning up at a quarter to one. A little rendezvous. Last Saturday I
finally cut the matter short and decided to call on my much-travelled friend,
Adolph Bruun. To that end I set out at about seven in the evening for Vestergade,
where someone had told me he was living. However, he was not there, not even
on the third floor, which I reached quite out of breath. As I was about to descend,
my ear caught the sound of a melodious feminine voice saying, ‘On Monday,
then, one o’clock at the exhibition; the others are all out then, but you know I
never dare see you at home.’ The invitation was not to me but to a young man
who was out of the door in a flash, and so quickly that not even my eye, let alone
my legs, could catch him. Why is there no gaslight on the stairway? At least I
might have seen whether it was worthwhile being so punctual. Still, if there had
been a gaslight I might not have heard. What exists is the rational, after all;
11
I
am and remain an optimist … Now, which one is her? The exhibition is
swarming with girls, to quote Donna Anna.
12
It is exactly a quarter to one. My
beautiful unknown! Would that your intended were in every way as punctual as
I; or perhaps you would rather he never came a quarter of an hour too early; as
you will, I am in every way at your service … Bewitching enchantress, witch or
fairy, let your cloud vanish, reveal yourself, you are presumably already here,
but invisible to me; betray yourself, for I hardly dare expect any other kind of
revelation. Could there perhaps be several up here on the same errand as she?
Quite possibly. Who knows the ways of man, even when he goes to exhibitions?
– But there comes a young girl in the front room, hurrying, faster than a bad
conscience after a sinner. She forgets to hand over her ticket and the man in red
stops her. Heaven preserve us! What a rush she’s in! It must be her. Why such
premature impetuosity? It still isn’t one o’clock. Do but remember that you are
to meet the beloved. Is it no matter at all how one looks on such occasions, or is
this what it means to put one’s best foot forward? When such an innocent young
hot-head keeps a tryst, she tackles the matter like a madwoman. She is all of a
flutter. As for me, I sit here comfortably in my chair, contemplating a delightful
pastoral landscape … She’s a devil’s child, she storms through all the rooms.
You must learn to hide your eagerness a little; remember for example what was
said to Lisbeth: ‘Does it become a young girl to let it be seen how eager she is to
pair?’
13 But of course your meeting is one of those innocent ones … Lovers
usually consider a tryst a most beautiful moment. I myself still remember as
clearly as if it were yesterday the first time I hastened to the appointed place,
with a heart as full as it was ignorant of the joy awaiting me, the first time I
knocked three times, the first time the window was opened, the first time the
little door was opened by the invisible hand of a girl who concealed herself in
opening it, the first time I hid a girl under my cloak in the light summer night.
But much illusion is blended with this judgement. The dispassionate third party
does not always find the lovers most beautiful at this moment. I have been
witness to trysts where, although the girl was charming and the man handsome,
the whole impression was well-nigh disgusting and the meeting itself far from
beautiful, though no doubt it seemed so to the lovers. In a way one gains
something by becoming more experienced; for although one loses the sweet
unrest of impatient longing, one gains a preparedness to make the moment really
beautiful. It can irritate me to see a man given such an opportunity so bewildered
that love alone is enough to give him delirium tremens. But what does the farmer
know of cucumber salad? Instead of being level-headed enough to enjoy her
disquiet, to allow it to enflame her beauty and kindle it, he produces only a
charmless confusion, and yet he goes joyfully home imagining it to have been
something glorious … But what the devil has become of the fellow? It’s already
two o’clock. What fine types, these sweethearts! A scoundrel like that lets a
young girl wait for him! Not me, I’m a trustworthy person of quite different
calibre! Maybe it would be best to speak to her now, since she is passing by for
the fifth time. ‘Pardon my boldness, fair young lady. You are no doubt looking
for your family up here. You have hurried past me several times, and as my eyes
followed you, I noticed you always stop in the next but last room; perhaps you
are unaware that there is still another room further in. Perhaps you will find them
there.’ She curtsies to me; it suits her well. The occasion is favourable. I am glad
the person has not come; one always fishes best in troubled waters. When a
young girl is emotionally disturbed, one can successfully venture that which
would otherwise be ill-starred. I have just bowed to her as politely and distantly
as possible. I sit down again in my chair, look at my landscape, and watch her.
To follow her straightaway would be too risky; she might find me intrusive and
then immediately be on her guard. Just now she believes I addressed her out of
sympathy, I am in her good books. – I know quite well there’s not a soul in the
inner room. Solitude will have a beneficial effect upon her. So long as she sees
many people around her she is agitated; if she is alone she will be calm. Quite
right, she is still in there. After a while I shall approach her en passant; I have
earned the right to make a remark, she owes me at least a greeting … She’s
sitting. Poor girl, she looks so sad. She has been crying, I think, or at least has
tears in her eyes. It is outrageous making a girl like that cry. But be calm, you
shall be avenged, I shall avenge you, he will learn what it means to keep her
waiting. – How beautiful she is, now that the various squalls have subsided and
she rests in a single mood. Her being is a harmony of sadness and pain. She
really is captivating. She sits there in travelling clothes, yet it wasn’t she who
was to travel, she put them on so as to journey out in search of joy; now it is a
sign of her pain, for she is like someone from whom gladness departs. She looks
out, as though constantly taking leave of the loved one. Let him go! – The
situation is favourable, the moment beckons. The thing now is to express myself
in a way that makes it seem that I believed she was looking for her family or a
party of friends up here, and yet warmly enough, too, for every word to be
appropriate to her feelings, then I shall have a chance to worm my way into her
thoughts. – Now devil take the scoundrel! If there isn’t a man arriving who can
only be him. No, take me for a bungler, just as I’ve got the situation as I wanted
it. Yes, yes, something can surely be salvaged from it. I must touch upon their
relationship, have myself placed in the situation. When she sees me she’ll have
to smile at my believing she was looking for someone quite different. That smile
makes me her accomplice, which is always something. – A thousand thanks my
child, that smile is worth much more to me than you think; it is the beginning,
and the beginning is always the hardest. Now we are acquainted, and our
acquaintance is based upon a piquant situation; it is enough to be going on with.
You will hardly stay here more than an hour; within two hours I shall know who
you are – why else do you think the police keep census rolls?
the 9th
Have I gone blind? Has the soul’s inner eye lost its power? I have seen her, but
it’s as if I’d seen a heavenly revelation, so completely has her image vanished
from me again. Vainly do I call upon all the strength of my soul to conjure forth
this image. If ever I saw her again I’d recognize her immediately even if she
stood among a hundred. Now she has run away, and my mind’s eye seeks in vain
to overtake her with its longing. – I was walking along Langelinie,
14
to all
appearances unconcerned and without regard to my surroundings, although my
watchful glance let nothing go unobserved, when my eye fell on her. It fixed
itself unwaveringly upon her, it no longer obeyed its master’s will. It was
impossible for me to undertake any movement with it and use it to survey the
object I would behold; I did not see, I stared. Like a fencer who freezes in his
pass, so was my eye fixed, petrified in the direction it had taken. It was
impossible for me to look down, impossible to withdraw my glance, impossible
for me to see, because I saw far too much. The only thing I can remember is that
she wore a green cape, that’s all. One can call that catching the cloud instead of
Juno;
15 she has slipped away from me like Joseph from Potiphar’s wife and has
left only her cape behind.
16 She was accompanied by an oldish lady, who
appeared to be her mother. Her I can describe from top to toe, even though I
never really saw her but at most took her in en passant. So it goes. The girl made
an impression upon me and I have forgotten her. The other has made no
impression and I can remember her.
the 11th
The same contradiction still blinds my soul. I know I have seen her, but I know
also I have forgotten it again, in a way that the residue of memory left over gives
no refreshment. With a restlessness and vehemence that put my wellbeing at risk,
my soul demands this image, yet it does not appear; I could tear out my eyes to
punish them for their forgetfulness. When I have finished impatiently raging,
when I become calm, it is as if intimation and memory wove a picture which still
cannot take definite shape because I cannot get it to stand still all at once. It is
like a pattern in a fine texture; the pattern is lighter than the ground and by itself
it is invisible because it is too light. – This is a curious state to be in, yet it has its
pleasant side both in itself and also because it proves to me that I am still young.
It can also teach me something else, namely that I’m always seeking my prey
among young girls, not among young wives. A wife has less of nature in her,
more coquetry; the relationship with her is not beautiful, not interesting, but
piquant, and the piquant is always what comes last. I had not expected to be able
to taste again the first fruits of infatuation. I am over my ears in love, I have got
what swimmers call a ducking; no wonder I am a little confused. So much the
better, so much the more I promise myself from this relationship.
the 14th
I hardly recognize myself. My mind rages like a sea tossed by the storms of
passion. If another could see my soul in this condition, it would look as if, like a
boat, it bored its bow down in the sea, as if with its fearful speed it had to plunge
into the depths of the abyss. He does not see that high up on the mast there sits a
sailor on lookout. Rage, you wild forces, stir your powers of passion! Even if the
crashing of your waves hurls the foam to the skies, you will still not manage to
pile up over my head; I sit serene as the King of the Cliff.
17
I can almost not find my footing, like a water-bird I seek in vain to alight on
my mind’s turbulent sea. And yet such turbulence is my element, I build upon it,
just as Alcedo ispida builds its nest on the sea.
18
Turkey cocks puff themselves up when they see red; it’s the same with me
when I see green, every time I see a green cape; and since my eyes often deceive
me, all my expectations are sometimes dashed on seeing a porter from Frederiks
Hospital.
19
the 20th
One has to restrict oneself, that is a main condition of all enjoyment. It doesn’t
seem I can expect so soon to get any information about the girl who fills my soul
and thoughts so much that they keep her loss alive. Now I shall stay quite calm,
for this state I’m in, this obscure and undefined but intense unrest, has a sweet
side nevertheless. I have always loved, on a moonlit night, to lie out in a boat on
one of our lovely lakes. I take in the sails and the oars, remove the rudder, stretch
out full-length, and gaze up into the vault of heaven. When the boat rocks on the
breast of the waves, when the clouds scud before the strong wind so that the
moon vanishes for a moment and then reappears, I find rest in this unrest. The
motion of the waves lulls me, their lapping against the boat is a monotonous
cradle-song. The swift flight of the clouds, the shifting light and shadow,
intoxicate me so that I am in a waking dream. Thus now, too, I lay myself out,
take in the sails and rudder; longing and impatient expectation toss me about in
their arms; longing and expectation become more and more quiet, more and
more blissful, they fondle me like a child; the heaven of hope arches over me;
her image floats by me like the moon’s, indistinct, blinding me now with its
light, now with its shadow. How enjoyable thus to splash up and down on a
stormy lake – how enjoyable to be stirred in oneself.
the 21st
The days go by and I am no nearer. Young girls give me pleasure more than
ever and still I have no desire to enjoy them. I seek her everywhere. It often
makes me unreasonable, blurs my vision, enervates my pleasure. That beautiful
season is soon coming now when, in public life in the streets and lanes, one buys
up these small favours which, in the winter’s social life, one can pay dearly
enough for, for although there is much a young girl can forget, she cannot forget
a situation. Social life does indeed bring one in contact with the fair sex, but
there is no artistry in starting an affair there. In social life every young girl is
armed, the occasion is threadbare and repeated over and over again; she gets no
voluptuous thrill. In the street she is on the open sea and everything therefore
seems more intense; it is as if there were mystery in everything. I would give a
hundred dollars for a smile from a young girl in a street situation, but not even
ten for a handclasp at a party; these are currencies of quite different kinds. Once
the affair is under way, you can then seek out the person in question at parties.
You have a secret communication with her that tempts you, and it is the most
effective stimulant I know. She dares not speak of it and yet she thinks of it; she
doesn’t know if you’ve forgotten it or not; you lead her astray in one way and
then another. Probably I shan’t collect much this year; this girl preoccupies me
too much. In a sense my returns will be poor; but then I have the prospect of the
big prize.
the 5th
Damned chance! I have never cursed you for appearing, I curse you because
you don’t appear at all. Or is this perhaps some new invention of yours, you
unfathomable being, barren mother of all that exists, sole remnant of that time
when necessity gave birth to freedom, when freedom let itself be duped back
into its mother’s womb? Damned chance! You, my only confidant, the only
being I consider worthy to be my ally and my enemy, always the same however
different, always unfathomable, always a riddle! You, whom I love with all the
sympathy in my soul, in whose image I form myself, why do you not appear? I
am not begging, I do not humbly entreat you to appear in this way or that; such
worship would be idolatry, not well-pleasing to you. I challenge you to battle:
why don’t you appear? Or has the turbulence in the world’s structure come to a
standstill? Is your riddle solved, so that you too have plunged into the ocean of
eternity? Terrible thought, for then the world has come to a standstill from
boredom! Damned chance! I am waiting for you. I do not wish to defeat you
with principles, or with what foolish people call character; no, I want to be your
poet! I’ll not be a poet for others. Show yourself! I compose you, I consume my
own verse and it is my sustenance. Or do you find me unworthy? As a bayadère
dances to the honour of God,
20
I have dedicated myself to your service; light,
thinly clad, supple, unarmed, I renounce everything, I own nothing, I have no
mind to own anything, I love nothing, I have nothing to lose; but haven’t I then
become more worthy of you, you who long ago must have wearied of depriving
people of what they loved, wearied of their cowardly sighs and prayers? Take me
by surprise, I am ready, no stakes, let us fight for honour. Show me her, show me
a possibility that looks like an impossibility; show me her in the shadows of the
underworld, I shall fetch her up.
21 Let her hate me, despise me, be indifferent to
me, love another, I’m not afraid; but stir up the waters, break your silence. It’s
cheap of you to starve me in this way, you who after all fancy yourself stronger
than I.
May 6th
Spring is at hand. Everything is in bloom, including the young girls. Capes are
laid aside, and presumably my green one has been hung up. That’s what comes
of making a girl’s acquaintance in the street instead of at a party, where one finds
out immediately what she is called, what family she is from, where she lives,
whether she is engaged. This last is extremely important for all steadfast and
soberminded suitors, to whom it would never occur to fall in love with a girl
who was engaged. Such an easy-paced ambler would be in deadly peril if he
were in my place; he would be completely devastated if his efforts to acquire
information were crowned with success, with the bonus that she was engaged.
But that doesn’t worry me much. An engaged girl is only a comic difficulty. I
have no fear either of comic or of tragic difficulties; all I fear are the tediously
long-drawn-out ones. So far I haven’t secured a single piece of information, in
spite of surely leaving no stone unturned and often feeling the truth of the poet’s
words:
Nox et hiems longaeque viae, saevique dolores
mollibus his castris, et labor omnis inest.
22
Perhaps after all she doesn’t live here in town, perhaps she is from the country,
perhaps, perhaps – I could go crazy over all these perhapses, and the more crazy
I become, the more perhapses. I always have money in readiness for a journey.
In vain I look for her at the theatre, at concerts, ballets, and on promenades. That
pleases me in a way; a young girl who takes too much part in such
entertainments is generally not worth conquering; she usually lacks that
originality which for me is a sine qua non. One can more easily imagine finding
a Preciosa
23 among the gypsies than in the cheap dancing-halls where young
girls are put up for sale – in all innocence, of course, Lord preserve us, what
else?
the 12th
Yes, my child, why didn’t you stay standing quite still at the door? There is
nothing at all reprehensible about a young girl’s stopping in a doorway when it’s
raining. I do the same sometimes when I have no umbrella, sometimes even
when I have, as for instance now. Besides, I could mention a number of
respectable ladies who have not hesitated to do so. You have only to stand
quietly, turn your back to the street, so that passers-by can’t tell whether you are
standing there or are about to go into the house. On the other hand, it is unwise
to hide oneself behind the door when it is half open, mainly because of the
consequences; for the more you are hidden, the more unpleasant it is to be
surprised. But if you do hide, you should stand quite still, committing yourself to
the good genie and the custody of all the angels; you should particularly refrain
from peeping out – to see if it has stopped raining. If you want to find out, then
step out boldly and look earnestly up into the sky. But if you poke your head out
a little curiously, shyly, anxiously, uncertainly, and then hurriedly draw it in
again – then every child understands that movement; it’s called playing hideand-seek. And I, who always take part, I should of course hold back and not
answer when asked … Don’t think I’m getting any injurious ideas, you hadn’t
the slightest intention when you poked out your head, it was the most innocent
thing in the world. In return you mustn’t get ideas about me, my good name and
reputation won’t stand it. Besides, it was you who started it. I advise you never
to tell anyone of this; you were in the wrong. What else can I do other than what
any gentleman would – offer you my umbrella? – Where has she got to?
Excellent, she has hidden herself in the porter’s doorway. – She is a most
charming little girl, merry, pleased. – ‘Do you know anything of a young lady
who just a blessed moment ago poked her head out of this doorway, evidently in
need of an umbrella? It is she I am looking for, I and my umbrella.’ – You laugh
– perhaps you will allow me to send my servant to fetch it tomorrow, or if you
ask me to call a carriage – nothing to thank me for, it is only due courtesy. – She
is one of the most joyful girls I have seen in a long time, her glance is so
childlike and yet so forthright, her nature so charming, so pure, and yet she is
curious. – Go in peace, my child, if it were not for a certain green cape, I might
have wanted to make a closer acquaintance. – She walks down to
Købmagergade. How innocent and trusting, not a sign of prudery. Look how
lightly she walks, how gaily she tosses her head – the green cape demands selfdenial.
the 15th
Thank you, kind chance, accept my thanks! Straight she was and proud,
mysterious and rich in ideas as a spruce, a shoot, a thought, which from deep in
the earth sprouts up towards heaven, unexplained and to itself inexplicable, a
whole that has no parts. The beech crowns itself, its leaves tell of what has taken
place beneath; the spruce has no crown, no history, a mystery to itself – such was
she. She was hidden from herself inside herself, she rose up from out of herself,
she had a self-contained pride, like the daring flight of the spruce, even though it
is fastened to the earth. A sadness poured over her like the cooing of the woodpigeon, a deep longing that had no want. She was a riddle, who mysteriously
possessed her own solution, a secret, and what are all diplomats’ secrets
compared with this, an enigma, and what in all the world is so beautiful as the
word that solves it? How significant, how pregnant, language is: ‘to solve’ [at
løse], what ambiguity it contains, how beautiful and strong in all the
combinations where this word appears! As the wealth of the soul is a riddle, as
long as the ligature of the tongue is not loosed [løst], and the riddle thereby
solved [løst], so is a young girl, too, a riddle. – Thank you, kind chance, accept
my thanks! If I had seen her first in winter she’d have been wrapped in that
green cape, frozen perhaps and, in her, Nature’s inclemency might have
diminished its own beauty. But now, what luck! I saw her first at the most
beautiful time of year, in the spring, in the light of late afternoon. True, winter
also has its advantages. A brilliantly lit ballroom can indeed be a flattering
setting for a young girl in evening dress. But she seldom appears to best
advantage here, partly because everything demands it of her, a demand whose
effect is disturbing whether she gives in to it or resists, and partly because
everything suggests transience and vanity, and evokes an impatience that makes
the enjoyment less soothing. At times I would not wish to dispense with the
ballroom, I would not forgo its costly luxury, its priceless abundance of youth
and beauty, its manifold play of forces; but then it isn’t so much that I enjoy
myself as gorge myself in possibility. It is not a single beauty that captivates me
but a totality; a dream image floats past, in which all these feminine natures form
their own configurations among one another, and all these movements seek
something, seek rest in one picture that is not seen.
It was on the path between Nørre-and Østerport,
24 about half-past six. The sun
had lost its strength, its memory only was preserved in a mild radiance spreading
over the landscape. Nature breathed more freely. The lake was calm, smooth as a
mirror. The comfortable houses on Blegdammen were reflected in the water,
which further out was dark as metal. The path and the buildings on the other side
were lit by the faint rays of the sun. The sky was clear and only a single light
cloud floated over it unnoticed, best seen by directing your eyes at the lake, over
whose shining forehead it vanished from view. Not a leaf moved. – It was her.
My eye did not deceive me, even though the green cape had done so. In spite of
being prepared now for so long, it was impossible to control a certain
excitement, a rising and falling, like the song of the lark that rose and fell in the
adjacent fields. She was alone. How she was dressed I have forgotten again, and
yet now I have a picture of her. She was alone, preoccupied, evidently not with
herself but with her thoughts. She was not thinking, but the quiet pursuit of her
thoughts wove a picture of longing before her soul, possessed by presentiment,
inexplicably like a young girl’s many sighs. She was at her most beautiful age. A
young girl does not develop in the sense that a boy does; she does not grow, she
is born. A boy begins straightaway to develop, and it takes a long time; a young
girl takes a long time being born and is born full-grown. Therein lies her infinite
richness; the moment she is born she is fully grown, but this moment of birth
comes late. Therefore she is born twice, the second time when she marries, or,
rather, at that moment she ceases being born, that is her moment of birth. It is not
just Minerva who sprang fully grown from the head of Jupiter, not just Venus
who rose from the ocean in all her beauty; every young girl is like this if her
womanliness has not been destroyed by what people call development. She
awakens not by degrees but all at once; on the other hand, she dreams all the
longer, provided people are not so unreasonable as to arouse her too early. But
this dream is an infinite richness. – She was preoccupied not with herself but in
herself, and in her this preoccupation was an infinite peace and repose. This is
how a young girl is rich; encompassing this richness makes oneself rich. She is
rich even though she does not know that she owns anything. She is rich, she is a
treasure. A quiet peacefulness brooded over her and a little sadness. She was
light to lift up with the eyes, as light as Psyche who was carried off by genies,
25
lighter still, for she carried herself. Let theologians dispute on the Virgin Mary’s
Assumption; to me it seems not inconceivable, for she no longer belonged to the
world; but the lightness of a young girl is incomprehensible and makes mockery
of the law of gravity. – She noticed nothing and therefore believed herself
unnoticed. I kept my distance and absorbed her image. She was walking slowly,
no urgency disturbed her peace or the quiet of her surroundings. By the lake sat a
boy fishing, she stopped and looked at the mirror surface of the water and the
small river. Although she had not been walking vigorously she sought to cool
herself. She loosened a little kerchief fastened about her neck under her shawl. A
soft breeze from the lake fanned a bosom as white as snow, yet warm and full.
The boy seemed unhappy to have a witness to his catch; he turned to her with a
somewhat phlegmatic glance and watched her. He really cut a ridiculous figure,
and I cannot blame her for beginning to laugh at him. How youthfully she
laughed! If she had been alone with the boy I don’t think she would have been
afraid of coming to blows with him. Her eyes were large and radiant; when one
looked into them they had a dark lustre which, because of their impenetrability,
gave a hint of their infinite depth; they were pure and innocent, gentle and quiet,
full of mischief when she smiled. Her nose was finely arched; when I saw her
sideways it seemed to merge with the forehead, making it a little shorter and a
little more spirited. She walked on, I followed. Happily there were many
strollers on the path; while exchanging a few words with some of them, I let her
gain a little on me and soon overtook her again, thus relieving myself of the need
to keep my distance by walking as slowly as she did. She walked in the direction
of Østerport. I wished to see her more closely without being seen. At the corner
stood a house from which that might be possible. I knew the family and so
needed only to call on them. I hurried past her at a good pace, as though paying
her not the slightest heed. I got a good lead on her, greeted the family right and
left, and then took possession of the window which overlooked the path. She
came, I looked and looked while at the same time keeping up a conversation
with the tea party in the drawing-room. The way she walked easily convinced
me she hadn’t taken many dancing lessons, yet it had a pride, a natural nobility,
but an artlessness. I had another opportunity to see her that I really had not
reckoned with. From the window I could not see very far down the path, but I
could see a jetty extending out into the lake, and to my great surprise, I
discovered her again out there. It occurred to me that perhaps she belonged out
here in the country; maybe the family had summer rooms. I was already on the
point of regretting my call, for fear that she might turn back so that I would lose
sight of her; indeed, the fact that she could be seen at the extreme end of the jetty
was a sort of sign that she was disappearing from my view – when she appeared
close by. She had gone past the house; in great haste I seized my hat and cane in
order, if possible, to walk past and then lag behind her several times again until I
found out where she lived – when in my haste I jostled the arm of a lady about to
serve tea. A frightful screaming arose. I stood there with my hat and cane and,
anxious only to get away and if possible give a twist to the matter to motivate
my retreat, I exclaimed with great feeling, ‘Like Cain I shall be banished from
the place where this tea was spilled.’ But as if everything conspired against me,
the host conceived the desperate idea of following up my remarks and declared,
loudly and solemnly, that I was forbidden to leave before I had enjoyed a cup of
tea; I myself served the ladies the tea I had deprived them of, and thus made
good everything once more. Since I was perfectly certain that my host, under the
circumstances, would consider it a courtesy to use force, there was nothing for it
but to remain. – She had vanished.
the 16th
How beautiful to be in love, how interesting to know one is in love! See, that’s
the difference! The thought of her disappearing a second time can be irritating
but in a sense it pleases me. The picture I now have of her wavers
indeterminately between being her actual and her ideal image. I am now evoking
it, but precisely because either it is real or it has at least its source in reality, it
has its own fascination. I feel no impatience, since she must belong here in town,
and for me that is enough for the moment. It is this possibility that makes her
image properly appear – everything should be savoured in slow draughts. And
should I not indeed be relaxed, I who consider myself the darling of the gods, to
whom befell the rare good fortune to fall in love again? That, after all, is
something no art, no study, can produce; it is a gift. But since I have succeeded
in stirring up a love once more, I want at least to see how long it can be kept
going. This love I coddle as I never did my first. Such an opportunity is not
given every day, it seems, so it is truly a matter of making the most of it. That’s
what drives one to despair. Seducing a girl is no art, but it needs a stroke of good
fortune to find one worth seducing. – Love has many mysteries, and this first
infatuation is also a mystery, even if a minor one – most people who rush into it
get engaged or indulge in other foolish pranks, and then it’s all over in the
twinkling of an eye and they don’t know what they have conquered or what they
have lost. Twice now she has appeared before me and vanished; that means that
soon she will appear more frequently. After he has interpreted Pharaoh’s dream,
Joseph adds: ‘The fact that you dreamt this twice, means that it will soon come
to pass.’
26
Still, it would be interesting if one could see a little in advance those forces
whose coming on the scene makes for life’s content. She lives her life now in
peace and quiet; she has no suspicion I even exist, even less what goes on inside
me, less still the certainty with which I survey her future; for my soul demands
more and more reality, it is becoming stronger and stronger. When, at a first
glance, a girl does not make a deep enough impression upon one to awaken the
ideal, then the real thing is usually not particularly desirable. But if she does
awaken it, then however experienced one may be, generally one is a little
overwhelmed. But for someone uncertain of his hand, his eye and his victory, I
would always advise him to chance an attack at this first stage when, just
because he is overwhelmed, he is in possession of extraordinary powers. For this
being overwhelmed is a curious mixture of sympathy and egoism. On the other
hand, he will forgo an enjoyment because he does not enjoy a situation he
himself is secretly involved in. What is nicest is hard to decide; what the most
interesting, easy. However, it is always good to get as close to the limit as
possible. That is the real pleasure and what others enjoy I’ve no idea. The mere
possession isn’t much and the means lovers use are generally wretched enough;
they even stoop to money, power, influence, sleeping draughts, and so on. But
what pleasure can there be in love when it is not the most absolute selfsurrender, that is, on the one side? But that as a rule requires spirit, and as a rule
these lovers lack that.
the 19th
So her name is Cordelia. Cordelia! That’s a pretty name, which is also
important, since often it is very disconcerting to have to use an ugly name in
connection with the tenderest attributions. I recognized her a long way off; she
was walking with two other girls on her left. The way they walked suggested
they would soon be stopping. I stood at the corner and read a poster while
keeping a constant eye on my unknown. They took leave of one another. The
two had presumably come a little out of their way, since they took an opposite
direction. She set off towards my corner. When she had taken a few steps, one of
the other girls came running after her, calling loudly enough for me to hear,
‘Cordelia! Cordelia!’. Then the third girl came up; they put their heads together
for a private conference, which with my keenest ear I tried in vain to hear. Then
all three laughed and went off in rather greater haste in the direction the two had
taken before. I followed. They went into a house on the Strand. I waited quite a
time since it seemed likely that Cordelia would soon return alone. But that didn’t
happen.
Cordelia! That is really an excellent name; it was also the name of the third of
King Lear’s daughters, that remarkable girl whose heart did not dwell upon her
lips, whose lips were silent when her heart was full.
27 So too with my Cordelia.
She resembles her, of that I’m certain. But in another sense her heart does dwell
upon her lips, not in words but more cordially in the form of a kiss. How full of
health her lips were! Never have I seen prettier.
That I am really in love I can tell among other things by the secrecy, almost
even to myself, with which I treat this matter. All love is secretive, even faithless
love when it has the necessary aesthetic element. It has never occurred to me to
want confidants or boast of my affairs. So it was almost gratifying not to get to
know her address but a place that she frequents. Besides, perhaps because of this
I have come even nearer to my goal. I can begin my investigations without
attracting her attention, and from this fixed point it shouldn’t be difficult to gain
access to her family. Should that prove difficult, however, eh bien; it’s all in the
day’s work; everything I do I do con amore; and thus also I love con amore.
the 20th
Today I got hold of some information about the house she disappeared into. It’s
a widow with three blessed daughters. An abundance of information can be got
from that source, that’s if they have any. The only difficulty is to understand this
information when raised to the third power, since all three talk at once. She is
called Cordelia Wahl, and she is the daughter of a Navy captain. He died some
years ago, and the mother too. He was a very hard and strict husband. Now she
lives in the house with her aunt, her father’s sister, who is said to resemble her
brother but is a very respectable woman besides. So far so good, but beyond that
they know nothing of this house; they never go there, but Cordelia often visits
them. She and the two girls are taking a course at the Royal Kitchens. She
usually goes there in the afternoon, sometimes also in the morning, never in the
evening. They live a very secluded life.
So that’s the end of the story. There seems to be no bridge by which I can slip
over into Cordelia’s house.
She has, then, some conception of life’s pains, of its darker side. Who would
have thought it of her? Still, these memories belong to her earlier years; it is a
horizon she has lived under without really noticing it. That’s a very good thing;
it has saved her womanliness, she is not crippled. It can be useful, on the other
hand, for raising her to a higher level, if one knows how to bring it out. All such
things usually produce pride, in so far as they don’t crush, and certainly she is far
from being crushed.
the 21st
She lives by the ramparts; it isn’t one of the best localities, no neighbours over
the way for me to strike up acquaintance with, no public places from which I
could make my observations unnoticed. The ramparts themselves are hardly
suitable: one is too visible. If one goes down to the street, the other side right by
the ramparts, that will hardly do, for no one goes there and it would be too
conspicuous, or else one would have to go along the side on which the houses
front and then one can’t see anything. It’s a corner house. From the street one
can also see the windows to the courtyard, since there is no neighbouring house.
That is presumably where her bedroom is.
the 22nd
Today I saw her for the first time at Mrs Jansen’s. I was introduced. She didn’t
seem much concerned, or to take much note of me. I behaved as unobtrusively as
possible to be the more attentive. She stayed only a moment, she had merely
called to fetch the daughters, who were due to go to the Royal Kitchens. While
the two Jansen girls were getting on their wraps, we two were alone in the
drawing-room, and I made a few cool, almost nonchalant remarks to her, which
were returned with undeserved courtesy. Then they left. I could have offered to
accompany them, but that would have been enough to mark me down as a ladies’
man, and I am convinced she cannot be won in that way. – I preferred, instead, to
leave a moment after they had gone but considerably faster than they and by
another street, though still aiming at the Royal Kitchens, so that just as they
turned into Store Kongensgade I rushed past them in great haste, without
greeting or anything, to their great astonishment.
the 23rd
I have to gain access to the house, and for that I am, in military parlance, at the
ready. However, it looks like being a long-drawn-out and difficult affair. Never
have I known a family that lived so isolated. There are only herself and her aunt.
No brothers, no cousins, not a shred to seize on, no relatives however distant to
walk arm-in-arm with. I go about with one arm constantly hanging free; not for
the whole world would I take someone by the arm at this time. My arm is a
grapnel which must always be kept in readiness; it is designed for unexpected
returns, in case far off in the distance there should appear a remote relative or
friend, whom from that distance I could take lightly by the arm – then clamber
aboard. But in any case, it is wrong of the family to live so isolated; one deprives
the poor girl of the opportunity to get to know the world, to say nothing of what
other dangerous consequences it may have. It never pays. That goes for courting
too. Such isolation may well protect one against petty thievery; in a very
hospitable house opportunity makes the thief. But that doesn’t mean much, for
from girls of that kind there isn’t much to steal; when they are sixteen their
hearts are already completed samplers and I have never cared to write my name
where others have already written. It never occurs to me to scratch my name on a
windowpane or in an inn, or on a tree or a bench in Frederiksberg Gardens.
the 27th
The more I see her, the more I am convinced she is a very isolated figure. A
man should never be that, not even a young one, for since reflection is essential
to his development he must have come into contact with others. But for that
reason a girl should rather not be interesting, for the interesting always contains
a reflection upon itself, just as the interesting in art always gives you the artist
too. A young girl who wants to please by being interesting really only succeeds
in pleasing herself. This is the aesthetic objection to all forms of coquetry. All
the figurative coquetry which forms part of natural motion is another matter, for
instance feminine modesty, which is always the most delightful coquetry. An
interesting girl may indeed succeed in pleasing, but just as she has herself
renounced her femininity, so also are the men she pleases usually
correspondingly effeminate. A young girl of this kind really only becomes
interesting through her relationship to men. Woman is the weaker sex, and yet
for her, much more than for the man, it is essential to be alone with herself in her
younger years. She must be sufficient unto herself, but what she is sufficient in
and through is an illusion; it is the dowry that Nature has bestowed on her, as
with the daughter of a king. But it is just this resting in illusion that isolates her. I
have often wondered why nothing is more demoralizing for a young girl than
constant association with other young girls. Evidently, it is due to that
association being neither one thing nor the other. It disturbs the illusion but
doesn’t bring light to it. Woman’s highest destiny is to be a companion to the
man, but association with her own sex causes a reflection to focus upon this
association, and instead of becoming a companion she becomes a lady’s
companion. Language itself has much to say in this respect. The man is called
Master but the woman is not called Handmaiden or anything of that sort; no, an
essential qualification is used, she is a ‘companion’, not a ‘companioness’. If I
were to imagine my ideal of a girl, she would always have to stand alone in the
world and therefore be left to herself, but especially not have girl friends. True,
the Graces were three, but surely it has never occurred to anyone to imagine
them conversing with one another; in their silent trinity they form a beautiful
feminine unity. In this respect I might almost be tempted to recommend the
return of the lady’s bower, were this constraint not also injurious. It is always
most desirable for a young girl to be allowed her freedom but no opportunity
offered her. This makes her beautiful and saves her from being interesting. It is
in vain to give a young girl who has spent a great deal of time with other girls a
maiden’s veil or a bridal veil; on the other hand, a man with enough aesthetic
appreciation always finds that a girl who is innocent in a deeper and truer sense
is brought to him veiled, even if bridal veils are not in fashion.
She has been brought up strictly; I honour her parents in their graves for that.
She lives a very reserved life, and for that I could fall on her aunt’s neck in
gratitude. She is not yet acquainted with the pleasures of the world, does not
have the chattering surfeit. She is proud, she defies what other young girls find
pleasure in. That’s as it should be; it is an untruth which I shall know how to
work to my profit. She takes no pleasure in ceremony and fuss as other young
girls do; she is a little polemical, but that is necessary for a young girl with her
enthusiasms. She lives in the world of imagination. Were she to fall into the
wrong hands, it might bring something very unwomanly out of her, precisely
because there is so much womanliness in her.
the 30th
Everywhere our paths cross. Today I met her three times. I know of her every
little excursion, when and where I shall come across her. But this knowledge is
not used to secure a meeting. On the contrary, I squander on a frightful scale. A
meeting which often has cost me several hours’ waiting is thrown away as a
trifle. I do not meet her, I merely touch tangentially upon the periphery of her
existence. If I know she is going to Mrs Jansen’s I prefer not to arrive there at the
same time, unless it is important for me to carry out some particular observation.
I prefer arriving a little early at Mrs Jansen’s, and then if possible meeting her at
the door as she is coming and I am leaving, or on the steps where I run
unheedingly past her. This is the first net she must be spun into. I do not stop her
on the street, or I might exchange a greeting but always keep my distance. She
must certainly be struck by our continual encounters; no doubt she notices that a
new body has appeared on her horizon, whose movement in a curiously
undisturbing way has a disturbing effect on her own, but of the law governing
this movement she has no idea. To look for its point of attraction her inclination
is rather to look right and left; that she is herself that point she is no more the
wiser than her polar opposite. With her it is as with those with whom I associate
in general, they believe I have a multiplicity of affairs; I am continually on the
go and say, like Figaro, ‘One, two, three, four intrigues at once, that’s my
delight.’ I must get to know her first and her whole state of mind before
beginning my assault. Most men enjoy a young girl as they do a glass of
champagne, in a single frothing moment; oh, yes! that’s really nice, and with
many young girls it’s no doubt the most one can make of it. But here there is
more. If the individual is too frail to stand clarity and transparency, well then,
one enjoys obscurity, but she can obviously stand it. The more surrender one can
bring into love, the more interesting it becomes. This momentary pleasure is a
case of rape, if not in an outward sense at least spiritually, and in rape there is
only an imaginary pleasure; it is like a stolen kiss, something with no substance
behind it. No, when one brings matters to the point where a girl has just one task
to accomplish for her freedom, to surrender herself, when she feels her whole
bliss depends on that, when she almost begs to submit and yet is free, then for
the first time there is enjoyment, but it always depends on a spiritual influence.
Cordelia! What a glorious name. I sit at home and practise it like a parrot. I say
‘Cordelia, Cordelia, my Cordelia, my own Cordelia’. I can scarcely forbear
smiling at the thought of the routine with which I will come, at a decisive
moment, to utter these words. One should always make preliminary studies,
everything must be properly prepared. It is no wonder that the poets always
portray this intimate moment, this beautiful moment, when the lovers, not
content with being sprinkled (sure enough, there are many who never get
further), but descending into love’s ocean divest themselves of the old person
and climb up from this baptism, only now, for the first time, properly knowing
each other as old acquaintances though only an instant old. For a young girl this
is always the most beautiful moment, and properly to savour it one should
always be a little higher, so that one is not only the one being baptized but also
the priest. A little irony makes this moment’s second moment one of the most
interesting; it is a spiritual undressing. One must be poet enough not to disturb
the ceremony yet the joker must always be sitting in ambush.
June 2nd
She is proud; I have seen that for a long time. When she sits together with the
three Jansens she talks very little, their chatter obviously bores her, and certainly
the smile on her lips seems to indicate that. I am counting on that smile. – At
other times she can surrender herself to an almost boyish wildness, to the great
surprise of the Jansens. For me it is not inexplicable when I consider her
childhood. She had only one brother, who was a year older. She knew only her
father and brother, had been a witness to serious scenes which produce a distaste
in general for jabber. Her father and mother had not lived happily together; what
usually beckons, more or less clearly or vaguely, to a young girl does not beckon
to her. She may possibly be puzzled about what it means to be a young girl.
Perhaps at times she wished she were not a girl but a man.
She has imagination, soul, passion, in short, all substantial qualities, but not in a
subjectively reflected form. A chance occurrence convinced me of that today. I
gathered from Jansen & Co. that she did not play the piano, it is against her
aunt’s principles. I have always regretted that attitude, for music is always a
good avenue for communicating with a young girl, if one takes care, be it noted,
not to pose as a connoisseur. Today I went to Mrs Jansen’s. I had half opened the
door without knocking, an impertinence that has often stood me in good stead,
and which, when necessary, I remedy with a bit of ridicule by knocking on the
open door. She sat alone at the piano – she seemed to be playing on the sly (it
was a little Swedish melody) – she was not an accomplished player, she became
impatient, but then gentler sounds came again. I closed the door and stood
outside, listening to the change in her moods; there was sometimes a passion in
her playing which reminds one of the maiden Mittelil,
28 who struck the golden
harp with such vigour that milk gushed from her breasts. – There was something
melancholy but also something dithyrambic in her execution. – I might have
rushed in, seized the moment – that would have been foolish. – Memory is not
just a preservative but also a means of enhancement; what is permeated by
memory seems doubled. – In books, especially in psalters, one often finds a little
flower – some beautiful moment has furnished the occasion for preserving it,
and yet the memory is even more beautiful. She is evidently concealing the fact
that she plays, or perhaps she plays only this little Swedish melody – has it
perhaps a special interest for her? All this I do not know, but the incident is for
that reason very important to me. Whenever I can talk more confidentially with
her, I shall lead her quite secretly to this point and let her fall into this trap.
June 3rd
I still cannot decide how she is to be understood. I wait therefore as quietly, as
inconspicuously – yes, as a soldier in a cordon of scouts who throws himself to
the ground to listen for the most distant sound of an approaching enemy. I do not
really exist for her, not in the sense of a negative relationship, but of no
relationship at all. Still I have not dared any experiment. To see her and love her
were the same – that’s what it says in romances – yes, it is true enough, if love
had no dialectic; but what does one really learn about love from romances?
Sheer lies that help to shorten the task.
When I think now, with the information I have gained, back upon the
impression the first meeting made upon me, I’d say that my ideas about her have
changed, but as much to her advantage as to mine. It isn’t quite the order of the
day for a young girl to go out so much alone or for a young girl to be so selfabsorbed. She was tested according to my strict critique and found: delightful.
But delight is a very fleeting factor which vanishes like yesterday when that day
is gone. I had not imagined her in the setting in which she lived, least of all so
unreflectingly familiar with life’s storms.
I wonder how it is with her emotions. She has certainly never been in love, her
spirit is too free-soaring for that; least of all is she one of those virgins
experienced in theory who, well before the time, can so fluently imagine being
in the arms of a loved one. The real-life figures she has met with have been less
than such as to confuse her about the relation of dreams to reality. Her soul is
still nourished by the divine ambrosia of ideals. But the ideal that floats before
her is hardly a shepherdess or a heroine in a romance, a mistress; it is a Jeanne
d’Arc or some such.
The question is always whether her femininity is strong enough to reflect
itself; or whether it is only to be enjoyed as beauty and charm. The question is
whether one dares to tense the bow more strongly. It is a wonderful thing in itself
to find a pure immediate femininity, but risking change gives you the interesting;
in which case the best thing is simply to saddle her with a suitor. There is a
superstition that this would harm a young girl. – Indeed, if she is a very refined
and delicate plant with just the one outstanding quality, charm, the best thing for
her would be never to have heard of love. But if this is not the case it is an
advantage, and I would never have scruples about getting hold of a suitor if none
is at hand. Nor must this suitor be a caricature, for then nothing is gained; he
must be a respectable young man, if possible even amiable, but too little for her
passion. She looks down on such a man, she acquires a distaste for love, she
almost despairs of her own reality when she senses what she might be and sees
what reality offers. If this is love, she says, it’s nothing to get excited about. She
becomes proud in her love, this pride makes her interesting, it transfigures her
being with a higher incarnation; but she is also nearer her downfall – all of
which only makes her more and more interesting. However, it is best to check
her acquaintances first to see whether there might not be such a suitor. At home
there is no opportunity, for next to no one comes there, but she does go out and
there could well be one. Getting hold of one before knowing this is always a
risky matter. Two individually insignificant suitors could have an injurious effect
by their relativity. I must find out now whether there isn’t such a lover sitting in
secret, lacking the courage to storm the citadel, a chicken-thief who sees no
opportunity in such a cloistered house.
The strategic principle then, the law of all motion in this campaign, is always
to involve her in an interesting situation. The interesting is the field on which
this conflict must constantly be waged, the potentialities of the interesting are to
be exhausted. Unless I am quite mistaken, this is what her whole being is based
on, so what I demand is just what she herself offers, indeed, what she demands.
Everything depends on spying out what the individual has to offer and what, as a
consequence, she demands. My love affairs therefore always have a reality for
me, they form an element in my life, a creative period, of which I am fully
aware; often they even involve some or other acquired skill. I learned to dance
for the first girl I loved; for a little dancer’s sake I learned French. At that time,
like all blockheads, I went to the market-place and was frequently made a fool
of. Now I go in for pre-market purchasing.
29 But perhaps she has exhausted one
aspect of the interesting; her secluded life seems to indicate that. Now it is a
matter of finding another aspect which seems to her at first sight not at all
interesting, but which, just because of this resistance, will become so. For this
purpose I select not the poetic but the prosaic. That then is the start. First her
femininity is neutralized by prosaic common sense and ridicule, not directly but
indirectly, together with what is absolutely neutral: spirit. She comes close to
losing the sense of her femininity, but in this condition she cannot stand alone;
she throws herself into my arms, not as if I were a lover, no, still quite neutrally.
Then her femininity awakens, one coaxes it to its greatest resilience, one lets her
come up against something effectively real, she goes beyond it, her femininity
attains almost supernatural heights, she belongs to me with a worldly passion.
the 5th
I did not have to go far. She visits at the home of Baxter, the wholesaler. Here I
found not only Cordelia, but also a person just as opportune. Edvard, the son of
the house, is head over heels in love with her, one needs only half of one eye to
see it in both of his. He is in trade, in his father’s office; a good-looking young
man, quite pleasant, rather shy, which last I suspect does not hurt him in her
eyes.
Poor Edvard! He simply doesn’t know how to tackle his love. When he knows
she is there in the evening he dresses up just for her, puts on his new dark suit
just for her, cuff-links just for her, and cuts an almost ridiculous figure among
the otherwise commonplace company in the drawing-room. His embarrassment
borders on the unbelievable. If it were a pose, Edvard would become a very
dangerous rival. Awkwardness has to be used very expertly, but with it one can
come a long way. How often have I used it to fool some little virgin! Girls
generally speak very harshly about awkward men, yet secretly they like them. A
little embarrassment always flatters a young girl’s vanity, she feels her
superiority, it is change in the hand. Then when you have lulled them to sleep,
you find an occasion on which they are made to believe you are about to die of
embarrassment, to show that, far from it, you can quite well shift for yourself.
Embarrassment deprives you of your masculine importance, and it is therefore a
relatively good way of neutralizing sexual difference. So when they realize that
it is only a pose, ashamed they blush inwardly, they are very conscious of having
gone too far; it’s as though they had gone on treating a boy too long as a child.
the 7th
We are firm friends now, Edvard and I; there exists a true friendship between
us, a beautiful relationship, the like of which has not occurred since the finest
days of the Greeks. We soon became intimates when, having embroiled him in
diverse observations concerning Cordelia, I got him to confess his secret. When
all secrets assemble, it goes without saying that this one can come along too.
Poor fellow, he has already sighed for a long time. He dresses up every time she
conies, then escorts her home in the evening, his heart throbs at the thought that
her arm is resting on his, they walk home gazing at the stars, he rings her bell,
she disappears, he despairs – but hopes for next time. He still hasn’t had the
courage to set his foot over her threshold, he who has so excellent an
opportunity. Although I cannot refrain inwardly from making fun of Edvard,
there is something nice about his childlikeness. Although ordinarily I fancy
myself fairly experienced in the whole quintessence of the erotic, I have never
observed this state in myself, this lovesick fear and trembling, or not to the
extent that it removes my self-possession; I know it well enough in other ways,
but in my case it tends to make me stronger. One might perhaps say that in that
case I’ve never been in love. Perhaps. I have taken Edvard to task, I have
encouraged him to rely on my friendship. Tomorrow he is going to take a
decisive step: go in person and invite her out. I have led him to the desperate
idea of begging me to go with him; I have promised to do so. He takes this to be
an extraordinary display of friendship. The occasion is exactly as I would have
it: we burst in on her in the drawing-room. Should she have the slightest doubt as
to the meaning of my conduct, this will once more confuse everything.
Hitherto I have not been accustomed to preparing myself for my conversation;
now it has become a necessity in order to entertain the aunt. I have taken on the
honourable task of conversing with her to cover up Edvard’s infatuated advances
to Cordelia. The aunt has previously lived in the country, and through a
combination of my own painstaking studies in the agronomic literature and the
aunt’s reports of her practical experience, I am making significant progress in
insight and efficiency.
With the aunt I am totally successful; she considers me a steady, reliable man
with whom it is a decided pleasure to have dealings, unlike our dandies. With
Cordelia I seem not to be particularly in favour. No doubt her femininity is of too
purely innocent a kind for her to require every man to dance attendance on her,
yet she is all too aware of the rebel in me.
Sitting thus in the comfortable drawing-room while she, like a good angel,
diffuses her charm everywhere, over everyone with whom she comes in contact,
over good and evil, I sometimes begin to grow inwardly impatient; I am tempted
to rush out from my hiding-place; for though I sit there before everyone’s eyes in
the drawing-room, I am really sitting in ambush. I am tempted to grasp her hand,
to take the whole girl in my arms, to hide her within me in case someone else
should take her from me. Or when Edvard and I leave them in the evening, when
in taking leave she offers me her hand, when I hold it in mine I find it difficult
sometimes to let the bird slip out of my hand. Patience – quod antea fuit impetus,
nunc ratio est
30– she must be quite otherwise woven into my web, and then
suddenly I let the whole power of love rush forth. We have not spoiled that
moment for ourselves with kisses and cuddles, by premature anticipations, for
which you can thank me, my Cordelia. I work at developing the contrast, I tense
the bow of love to wound the deeper. Like an archer, I slacken the bowstring,
tighten it again, listen to its song – it is my martial music – but I do not take aim
with it yet, do not even lay the arrow on the string.
When a small number of people often come together in the same room, a kind
of tradition soon develops in which each one has his own place, his station; it
becomes a picture one can unfold at will, a chart of the terrain. That is also how
we unite now to form a picture in the Wahl home. In the evening we drink tea
there. Generally the aunt, who until now has been sitting on the sofa, moves over
to the little work-table, which place Cordelia in turn vacates. She goes over to
the tea-table in front of the sofa, Edvard follows her. I follow the aunt. Edvard
tries to be secretive, he wants to whisper, and he usually succeeds so well as to
become entirely mute. I make no secrets of my outpourings to the aunt – market
prices, a calculation of how many quarts of milk are needed to produce a pound
of butter, through the middle-term of cream and the dialectic of the butter-churn;
not only do these things form a reality which any young girl can listen to without
harm, but, what is far rarer, it is a solid, thorough and edifying conversation,
equally improving for mind and heart. I generally sit with my back to the teatable and the day-dreamings of Edvard and Cordelia. Meanwhile I day-dream
with the aunt. And is Nature not great and wise in her productions, is not butter a
precious gift, what a glorious result of Nature and art! Certainly the aunt would
be unable to hear what passed between Edvard and Cordelia, provided anything
passed between them at all; I have promised Edvard that, and I always keep my
word. On the other hand, I can easily overhear every word exchanged between
them, hear every movement. This is important for me, for one cannot tell how
far a desperate man will venture. The most cautious and faint-hearted men
sometimes do the most desperate things. Although I thus have nothing at all to
do with these two people, I can readily observe from Cordelia that I am
constantly an invisible presence between her and Edvard.
Nevertheless it is a peculiar picture we four make. If I were to look for a
familiar analogy, I might think of myself as Mephistopheles; but the difficulty is
that Edvard is no Faust. If I were to be his Faust, there is the difficulty again that
Edvard is no Mephistopheles. Neither am I a Mephistopheles, least of all in
Edvard’s eyes. He looks on me as his love’s good genie, and so he should, for at
least he can be sure that no one can watch over his love more solicitously than I.
I have promised him to engage the aunt in conversation and I discharge that
honourable assignment with all seriousness. The aunt practically vanishes before
our own eyes in sheer agricultural economics; we go into the kitchen and cellar,
up to the attic, look at the chickens, ducks, and geese, and so on. All this offends
Cordelia. What I am really after she cannot of course conceive. I become a riddle
to her, but not a riddle that tempts her into wanting to guess, one which irritates
her, yes makes her indignant. She has a strong sense that her aunt is almost being
made fun of, yet her aunt is a very respectable lady who certainly doesn’t
deserve that. On the other hand, I do it so well that she is perfectly aware that it
would be useless for her to try to put me off. Sometimes I carry things so far that
Cordelia secretly has to smile at her aunt. These are necessary exercises. Not that
I do this with Cordelia’s connivance; far from it, I would never make her smile at
her aunt. My expression remains unalterably earnest, but she cannot keep from
smiling. It is the first false teaching; we must teach her to smile ironically; but
this smile is aimed almost as much at me as at the aunt, for she simply does not
know what to think of me. After all, I might be one of those prematurely old
young men; it’s possible; there might be another possibility, and a third, and so
on. When she has smiled at her aunt she is indignant with herself, I turn around
and, without interrupting the conversation with the aunt, look at her quite
seriously, then she smiles at me and the situation.
Our relationship is not the tender and loyal embrace of understanding, not
attraction, it is the repulsion of misunderstanding. My relationship to her really
amounts to nothing at all. It is purely spiritual, which of course to a young girl is
nothing at all. The method I am now following has nevertheless extraordinary
advantages. Someone who appears as a gallant arouses mistrust and evokes
resistance; I am exempt from all that. I am not watched, on the contrary one
would rather look upon me as a trustworthy person fit to watch over the young
girl. The method has only one fault, it is slow; but for that reason it can be used,
and only to advantage, against individuals in whom the prize is the interesting.
What rejuvenating power a young girl has! Not the freshness of the morning
air, not the soughing of the wind, not the coolness of the ocean, not the fragrance
of wine and its delicious bouquet – nothing else in the world has this
rejuvenating power.
Soon I hope to have brought it to the point of her hating me. I have taken on
totally the character of a bachelor. I talk of nothing else but sitting at ease, lying
comfortably, having a reliable servant, a friend of good standing I can
thoroughly trust when on intimate terms. If I can now get the aunt to abandon
her agronomic deliberations I shall introduce her to these and so get a more
direct opportunity for irony. A bachelor one may laugh at, indeed have some
sympathy for, but a young man not without spirit outrages a young girl by such
conduct; the significance of her sex, its beauty and poetry, are all destroyed.
So the days pass; I see her, but I do not talk with her. In her presence I talk
with the aunt. Occasionally at night it occurs to me to give my love air. Then,
wrapped in my cloak, with my hat pulled down over my eyes, I go and stand
outside her window. Her bedroom looks out over the yard, but since the house is
on a comer it is visible from the street. Sometimes she stands for a moment at
the window, or she opens it, looks up at the stars, unobserved by all but the one
whom she would least of all think was aware of her. In these night hours I steal
about like a wraith, like a wraith I inhabit the place where she lives. I forget
everything, have no plans, no calculations, throw reason overboard, expand and
strengthen my chest with deep sighs, an exercise I need in order not to suffer
from the system which rules my behaviour. Others are virtuous by day and sin at
night; by day I am dissimulation, at night pure desire. If she saw me, if she could
look into my soul. If!
If this girl would only understand herself, she would have to admit that I am
the man for her. She is too intense, too deeply emotional to be happy in
marriage, it would not be enough to let her yield to a common seducer; if she
yields to me she salvages the interesting from the shipwreck. In relation to me,
she must, as the philosophers say with a play on words, zu Grunde gehen.
31
Really, she is tired of listening to Edvard. As always happens, where the
interesting is narrowly confined, one discovers all the more. Sometimes she
listens to my conversation with the aunt. When I see that, there comes a flash on
the far horizon intimating a quite different world, to the surprise of the aunt as
well as Cordelia. The aunt sees the lightning but hears nothing, Cordelia hears
the voice but sees nothing. The same instant everything is as it was before, the
conversation between the aunt and myself proceeds at its uniform pace, like the
hooves of post horses in the still of the night; it is accompanied by the samovar’s
sad singing. At moments like these the atmosphere in the drawing-room can
sometimes be unpleasant, especially for Cordelia. She has no one she can talk
with or listen to. If she turns to Edvard, she faces the risk of him doing
something foolish in his embarrassment. If she turns the other way, to her aunt
and me, then the certainty prevailing here, the monotonous hammerblow of our
steady conversation, forms the most disagreeable contrast. I can well understand
that to Cordelia it must seem that her aunt is bewitched, so completely does she
keep in step with my tempo. Nor can she take part in our entertainment; for this
is also one of the ways I have used to provoke her, that is, by letting myself treat
her altogether as a child. Not that I would permit myself any liberties with her on
that account, far from it. I know too well what a disturbing effect such things can
have, and it is especially important that her womanliness be able to rise up again
pure and lovely. Owing to my intimate relation to the aunt, it is easy for me to
treat her like a child who is no judge of the world. Her femininity is not offended
by this but merely neutralized; for though it cannot offend her femininity that she
knows nothing of market prices, it can irritate her that they should be the most
important thing in life. With my powerful support, the aunt outbids herself in this
direction. She has become almost fanatical, something she has to thank me for.
The only thing about me which she cannot stand is that I am not anything. I have
now begun the habit, every time something is said about a vacant position, of
saying, ‘That’s a job for me!’, and discussing it very seriously with her. Cordelia
always notices the irony, which is exactly as I wish.
Poor Edvard! Too bad he isn’t called Fritz. Whenever in my quiet thoughts I
dwell on my relation to him, I am reminded of Fritz in The Bride.
32 Like his
prototype, Edvard is also a corporal in the militia. To tell the truth, Edvard is also
distinctly tiresome. He doesn’t tackle the matter properly, and he is always too
well-dressed and stiff. Entre nous, for the sake of our friendship I turn up as
casually as possible. Poor Edvard! The only thing that pains me is that he is so
infinitely obliged to me that he almost doesn’t know how to thank me. To let
myself be thanked for it, that’s really too much.
But why can’t you be good children and behave? What have you done all
morning except shake my awning, pull at my window mirror and its string, play
with the bell-rope from the third floor, push against the windowpanes, in brief, in
every possible way proclaim your existence, as if you would beckon me out with
you? Yes, the weather is fine, but I have no desire, let me stay at home … After
all, you boisterous, wanton zephyrs, you happy lads, you can go alone, amuse
yourselves with the young maidens as usual. Yes, I know, no one can embrace a
maiden as seductively as you; she tries in vain to squirm away from you, she
cannot untwine herself from your tangle – and she doesn’t want to; for, cool and
refreshing, you do not inflame … Go your own way, leave me out … But then,
you say, there’s no satisfaction in it, it’s not for your own sake … very well,
then, I’ll come with you, but on two conditions. Here is the first. There lives on
Kongens Nytorv a young maiden; she is very pretty, but she has the impudence
not to want to love me, and what is worse, she loves another, and it has got to the
point where they go out walking arm in arm. I know he goes to fetch her at one
o’clock. Promise me now that the strongest blowers among you hide somewhere
in the vicinity when he comes out of the street door with her. The moment he is
about to turn down Store Kongensgade, this detachment rushes forward, in the
politest possible manner takes his hat from his head, and carries it at an even
speed just two feet in front of him, no faster, for then he might turn back home
again. He thinks he is always just on the point of catching it, he doesn’t even let
go of her arm. In this way you bring them through Store Kongensgade, along the
rampart to Nørreport, as far as Høibroplads … How long will that take? I’d say
about half an hour. At exactly half-past one I approach from Østergade. When
the detachment has brought the lovers out into the middle of the Plads, a violent
assault is made on them, in which you also whisk off her hat, tangle her curls,
carry off her shawl, while all the time his hat floats jubilantly higher and higher
into the air; in short, you bring about a confusion, so that not just I but the entire
public breaks out into roars of laughter, the dogs begin to bark, and the
watchman to toll his bell in the tower. You make her hat fly over to me, so I
become the happy individual who restores it to her. – Secondly: the section
following me must obey my every signal, keep within the bounds of propriety,
offer no affront to any pretty maiden, take no liberty greater than will allow her
to preserve her joy during the whole jest, her lips their smile, her eye its
tranquillity, and to stay unanxious. If a single one of you dares behave otherwise,
your name will be cursed. – And now off with you, to life and joy, to youth and
beauty; show me what I have often seen, and never weary of seeing, show me a
beautiful young woman, disclose her beauty for me in such a way that she
herself becomes even more beautiful; put her to a test that she will enjoy being
put to! – I choose Bredgade, but as you know, I have only until half-past one.
There comes a young girl, all smart and starched; today’s Sunday, of course …
Fan her a little, waft her with your coolness, glide in gentle currents about her,
embrace her with your touch! I sense the delicate blushing of her cheek, her lips
redden, her bosom lifts… It’s indescribable, isn’t it, my girl, it is a blissful
delight to inhale these refreshing airs? The little collar bends to and fro and like
a leaf. How deeply and soundly she breathes! Her pace slackens, she is almost
carried off by the gentle breeze, like a cloud, like a dream … Blow a little
stronger, in longer puffs! … She gathers herself together, the arms drawn closer
to her bosom, which she covers more carefully lest a gust of wind prove too
forward and steal softly and coolingly beneath the light covering … She assumes
a more healthy colouring, her cheeks become fuller, her eye clearer, her steps
firmer. All vexation makes a person more beautiful. Every young girl should fall
in love with the zephyr, for no man knows so well how to enhance her beauty by
struggling against her … Her body bends a little forward, she looks towards the
tips of her toes … Stop a little! It is too much, her figure becomes broader, loses
its pretty slenderness … Cool her a little! … It’s refreshing, isn’t it, my girl, after
being warm to feel those invigorating shivers? One could fling open one’s arms
in gratitude, in joy over existence … She turns her side to the breeze … Now
quick! a powerful gust, so that I can divine the beauty of her contours! … A little
stronger! to let the draperies close about her more precisely … That’s too much.
Her posture becomes awkward, the light step is disturbed … She turns again …
Blow, now, blow, try her! … Enough, too much! One of her curls has fallen …
will you kindly keep control of yourselves! – Here comes a whole regiment on
the march:
Die eine ist verliebt gar sehr;
Die andre wäre er gerne.
33
Yes, it is an undeniably bad appointment in life to walk on one’s future
brother-in-law’s left arm. For a girl this is about the same as a man’s being a
reserve clerk … But the clerk can get preferment and has his place in the office,
he is called in on exceptional occasions, and that is not the sister-in-law’s lot.
But her preferment, on the other hand, is not so slow – once she gets promoted
and is moved into another office … Blow now a little more briskly! When one
has something firm to hold on fast to, one can offer resistance … the centre
advances vigorously, the wings on either flank were unable to follow … He
stands his ground firmly enough, the wind can’t move him, he is too heavy for
that – but also too heavy for the wings to be able to lift him from the ground. He
thrust himself forward in order to show – that he is a heavy body; but the more
unmoved he stands, the more the young girls suffer from it … My beautiful
young ladies, may I not offer a piece of good advice: leave the future husband
and brother-in-law out of it, try to walk alone, and you will see, you will find it
much more satisfactory … Blow now a little more softly! … How they riot in
the wind’s billows; soon they will be cutting figures in front of each other down
the street – can any dance music produce a more frolicsome gaiety? And yet the
wind is not exhausting, it gives strength … Now they sweep along side by side,
in full sail down the street – can any waltz carry a young woman away more
seductively? And yet the wind does not weary, it supports … Now they turn
round to face the husband and brother-in-law … Isn’t a little opposition
pleasant? One likes to struggle to gain possession of what one loves; and one
will no doubt succeed, for there is a Providence that comes to the aid of love,
that is why the man has the wind in his favour … Haven’t I arranged it well?
When you have the wind at your back you can easily steer the loved one past
you; but when it blows against you, you are pleasantly excited, then you seek
refuge near him, and the wind’s breath makes you more wholesome and more
tempting, and more seductive, and the wind’s breath cools the fruit of your lips
which should preferably be enjoyed cold because it is so hot, as champagne is
said to be when kept near freezing … How they laugh and talk – and the wind
carries off the words – is there anything to talk about here now? – and they laugh
again and bend before the wind, and hold on to their hats, and watch their feet…
Stop now, lest the young girls get impatient and angry at us, or afraid of us! –
That’s it, resolutely and vigorously, the right foot in front of the left … How
bravely and buoyantly she looks about in the world … Do I see correctly? She is
hanging on to a man’s arm, so she’s engaged. Show me, my child, what kind of
present you have received on life’s Christmas tree? … Aha! really it seems to be
a very solid fiancé. She’s in the first stage of the engagement, then, she loves
him – that’s certainly possible, and yet her love flutters loosely about him, wide
and spacious; she still has the cloak of love which can conceal many … Blow a
little more! … Yes, when one walks so fast it is no wonder the ribbons on her hat
stiffen in the wind, that it looks as if they bore this light body like wings – and
her love – it follows too, like a fairy veil that the wind plays with. Yes, when you
see love like this, it seems so spacious; but when you are about to put it on, when
the veil must be resewn into an evening dress – then one won’t be able to afford
many puffs … Lord preserve us! When one has had the courage to take a
decisive step for one’s entire life, surely one has the heart to walk straight into
the wind. Who doubts it? Not I; but temper, temper, my little miss! Time is a
hard taskmaster, and the wind is not bad either … Tease her a little! … What
became of the handkerchief? … Oh, so you did recover it again … There went
one of the hat ribbons … it is really quite embarrassing for the intended who is
present. A girl friend approaches who must be greeted. It is the first time she has
seen you since the engagement; of course, showing that you are engaged is the
reason you are here on Bredgade, and moreover are thinking of going on to
Langelinie. I believe it is the custom for a newly wedded couple to go to Church
the first Sunday after the wedding, but engaged couples, on the other hand, go to
Langelinie. Yes, an engagement really also has much in common with
Langelinie … Watch out now! The wind is taking hold of your hat, hold on to it
a little, bend your head down … What a real shame you got no chance at all to
greet your girl friend, not enough calm to greet her with the superior air that an
engaged girl ought to assume before the unengaged … Blow a little more softly
now! … Now come the good days … how she clings to the beloved; she is just
far enough ahead to be able to turn her head back and look up at him, and rejoice
in him, her riches, her happiness, her hope, her future … Oh my girl, you make
too much of him … Or won’t you allow that he owes it to me and the wind that
he looks so vigorous? And don’t you yourself owe it to me, and to the soft
breezes that now bring you healing and turn pain into oblivion, that you look so
full of vitality, so full of longing, so expectant?
And I will not have a student
Who lies and reads at night,
But I will have an officer
With feathers in his hat.
34
One can see it in you at once, my girl, there is something in your look … No, a
student won’t do for you … But why exactly an officer? A graduate, finished
with his studies, couldn’t he do just as well? … Just now, however, I cannot help
you to either an officer or a graduate. But I can help you to some cooling breezes
… Blow a little harder now! … That’s right, throw the silk shawl back over your
shoulder; walk quite slowly, that should make your cheek a little paler and the
eye’s lustre more subdued … That’s it. Yes, a little exercise, especially on a fine
day like this, and a little patience, then no doubt you will get your officer. –
There’s a couple over there who are meant for each other. How measured their
steps, what poise their whole appearance presents, built on mutual confidence,
what pre-established harmony in all their movements, what assured solidity.
Their carriage is not light and graceful, they do not dance with each other, no,
there is a durability in them, a forthrightness, which arouses infallible hope and
inspires mutual respect. I will wager that their view of life is ‘Life is a road’.
And they also seem bent on walking with each other arm in arm through life’s
joys and sorrows. They are so much in harmony that the lady has even given up
the privilege of walking on the flagstones … But, my dear zephyrs, why are you
so busy with that couple? They don’t seem worth paying attention to. Is there
anything special to take note of? … But it is half-past one; off to Høibroplads.
One would not think it possible to calculate so accurately a soul’s historical
development. It shows how healthy Cordelia is. Truly, she is a remarkable girl.
Although she is quiet and modest, undemanding, there is an immense demand
lying there unconsciously. – It was obvious to me today when I saw her coming
in from the street. It’s as though the slight resistance a gust of wind can offer
arouses all her powers but without there being any internal conflict. She is not a
little insignificant girl who slips between your fingers, so fragile that you are
almost afraid she will go to pieces just by looking at her; but neither is she a
showy ornamental flower. Like a physician I can therefore observe with pleasure
all the symptoms in this case history.
Gradually I am beginning to close in on her in my attack, to go over into a
more direct assault. If I were to describe this change on my military map of the
family, I would say that I have turned my chair round so that now I am facing
her. I have more to do with her, address remarks to her, elicit answers from her.
Her soul has passion, intensity, and though not overblown in absurd and vain
reflections, it has a hankering for the unusual. My irony at the foolishness of
human beings, my scorn of their cowardice, of their lukewarm indolence,
fascinate her. She is fond enough of driving the chariot of the sun across the arch
of the heavens, of coming too near to the earth and scorching people a bit.
35 She
does not trust me, however. Up to now I have obstructed every approach, even in
spiritual respects. She must become stronger in herself before I can let her find
her repose in me. It may look in flashes as though it were her I would make the
confidante in my freemasonry, but it is only in flashes. She herself must be
developed inwardly; she must feel her soul’s resilience, she must test the world’s
weight. From her conversation and her eyes I can easily see what progress she is
making. Just once I have seen a destructive anger in them. She must owe me
nothing, for she must be free; love exists only in freedom, only in freedom are
there recreation and everlasting amusement. For although I intend her to fall into
my arms through, as it were, natural necessity, and am striving to bring things to
the point where she gravitates towards me, it is nevertheless also important that
she does not fall as a heavy body, but gravitates as spirit towards spirit. Although
she is to belong to me, it mustn’t be just in the unaesthetic sense of resting on me
like a burden. She must neither be a hanger-on physically speaking nor an
obligation morally. Between the two of us must prevail only the proper play of
freedom. She must be so light for me that I can take her on my arm.
Cordelia occupies me almost too much. I am losing my equanimity again, not
directly in her presence but when alone with her in the strictest sense. I can yearn
for her, not to talk with her but just to have her image float by me. When I know
she has gone out I can steal after her, not to be seen but to see. The other evening
we all left the Baxter house together. Edvard escorted her. In the greatest haste I
left them, hurried off to another street where my servant was waiting for me. In a
trice I had changed clothes and met her once more without her suspecting.
Edvard was silent as usual. Certainly I am in love, but not in the usual sense, and
therefore one must also be very careful; there are always dangerous
consequences; and after all one is in love only once. Nevertheless, the god of
love is blind and if one is clever one can delude him. The trick is to be as
receptive in regard to impressions as possible, to know the impression you are
making and the impression each girl makes on you. In this way you can even be
in love with many at the same time, because with each particular girl you are
differently in love. Loving just one is too little; loving all is being superficial;
knowing yourself and loving as many as possible, letting your soul hide all the
powers of love in itself, so that each gets its particular nourishment while
consciousness nevertheless embraces it all – that is enjoyment, that is living.
July 3rd
Edvard cannot really complain of me. Certainly, I want Cordelia to burn her
fingers on him, so that through him she gets a distaste for run-of-the-mill love
and in that way goes beyond her own limitations; but for that very reason it is
necessary for Edvard not to be a caricature, for that would not help. Now Edvard
is a good match, not just in the bourgeois sense of the word, which means
nothing in her eyes (things like that do not cross a seventeen-year-old girl’s
mind), he has a number of attractive personal qualities which I try to get him to
show to best advantage. Like a costumier, like a decorator, I fit him out as well
as the house’s resources stretch. Indeed, I sometimes hang a little borrowed
finery on him. Then when we accompany each other to Cordelia’s it is quite
strange walking beside him. It is as though he were my brother, my son, and yet
he is my friend, my contemporary, my rival. He could ever become a danger to
me. So, since he is bound to fall, the higher I can raise him the better; the more
consciousness it awakens in Cordelia of what she scorns, the more intense her
presentiment of what she desires. I help him to adjust, I commend him, in short I
do everything a friend can do for a friend. To set my coldness properly in relief, I
behave almost as though I were Edvard’s ardent admirer. I portray him as a
visionary. Since Edvard has no idea of how to help himself, I have to haul him
forward.
Cordelia hates and fears me. What does a young girl fear? Spirit. Why?
Because spirit constitutes the negation of her whole feminine existence.
Masculine good looks, a charming personality, etc. are good expedients, one can
also make conquests with them, but never win a complete victory. Why?
Because then one is making war upon a girl on her own ground, and there she is
always the stronger. With these methods one can make a girl blush, put her out
of countenance, but never call forth that indescribable, captivating anxiety which
makes her beauty interesting.
Non formosus erat, sed erat facundus Ulixes,
et tamen aequoreas torsit amore Deas.
36
Everyone should know his own powers. But something that has often disturbed
me is that even those who have natural endowments bungle things so. Really one
ought to be able straightaway to see in any young girl who has become the
victim of another’s, or rather of her own love, in what way she has been
deceived. The practised murderer uses a definite stab, and the experienced
policeman knows the perpetrator as soon as he sees the wound. But where does
one meet such systematic seducers, such psychologists? For most men, seducing
a girl means seducing a girl, full stop. And yet there is a whole language
concealed in this thought.
As a woman she hates me; as a gifted woman she fears me; as a woman of
intelligence she loves me. Now for the first time I have produced this conflict in
her soul. My pride, my defiance, my cold scorn, my heartless irony tempt her;
not as though she might wish to love me – no, there is certainly no trace of such
feelings in her, least of all towards me. She wants to compete with me. What
tempts her is the proud independence of people, a freedom like that of the Arabs
in the desert. My laughter and oddity neutralize every erotic impulse. She is
fairly at ease with me, and so far as there is any reserve, it is more intellectual
than feminine. Far from her regarding me as a lover, our relation to each other is
that of two able minds. She takes my hand, presses it a little, laughs, is attentive
to me in a purely Platonic sense. Then when the ironist and the scoffer have
fooled her long enough, I shall follow the directions to be found in an old verse:
‘The knight spreads out his cape so red, and begs the beautiful maiden to sit
thereon.’ However, I do not spread out my cape in order to sit with her on the
greensward, but to vanish with her into the air on the wings of thought. Or I do
not take her with me but set myself astride a thought, wave farewell, blow a kiss,
and vanish from her sight, audible only in the murmur of winged words; not, like
Jehovah,
37
in his voice more and more visible, but less and less, because the
more I speak, the higher I climb. Then she wants to go with me, off on the wings
of bold thoughts. Still, that’s only for a single moment; the next instant I am cold
and impassive.
There are different kinds of feminine blushes. There is the gross brick-red
blush; that’s the one romantic writers are always so free with when they have
their heroines blush all over. There is the refined blush; it is the blush of the
dawn’s early light. In a young girl it is above all price. The fleeting blush
produced by a happy idea is beautiful in the man, more beautiful in a youth,
lovely in a woman. It is a flash of lightning, the sheet lightning of the spirit. It is
most beautiful in the young, charming in the girl, because it appears in its
virginal state, and for that reason has the bashfulness of surprise. The older one
becomes, the less frequently this blush appears.
Sometimes I read something aloud to Cordelia; usually something very
inconsequential. Edvard must as usual keep the spotlight. So I have drawn his
attention to the fact that a very good way of getting on good terms with a young
girl is to lend her books. He has also gained considerably through this, for she is
directly beholden to him. It is I who gain most, for I dictate the choice of books
and remain remote. This gives me broad scope for my observations. I can give
Edvard whatever books I wish, since he is no judge of literature; I can risk what
I will, to whatever extreme. Then when I visit her in the evening, I make as if to
pick up a book by chance, turn over a few pages, read half-aloud, commend
Edvard for his attentiveness. Yesterday evening I wanted to assure myself of her
mental resilience by an experiment. I was undecided whether to have Edvard
lend her Schiller’s poems, so that I could accidentally chance on Thekla’s song
38
which I’d then recite, or Bürger’s poems. I chose the latter particularly because
his ‘Lenore’, however beautiful, is after all somewhat extravagant. I opened it at
‘Lenore’, read this poem aloud with all the pathos I could muster. Cordelia was
moved, she sewed with a rapid intensity as though it were her Vilhelm had come
to fetch.
39
I stopped. The aunt had listened without particular concern. She fears
no Vilhelms, living or dead – in any case her German is not all that good – but
found herself quite in her element when I showed her the beautifully bound copy
and began a conversation about the art of bookbinding. My purpose was to
destroy in Cordelia the impression of pathos at the very moment of its arousal.
She became a little anxious, but it was clear to me that this anxiety had an
uncomfortable effect on her, not a stimulating one.
Today my eyes have rested upon her for the first time. It is said that sleep can
make an eyelid so heavy that it closes of its own accord; perhaps this glance of
mine has a similar effect. Her eyes close, and yet obscure forces stir within her.
She does not see that I am looking at her, she feels it, feels it through her whole
body. Her eyes close and it is night, but inside her it is broad daylight.
Edvard must go. He is treading on the boundary. Any moment I can expect
him to go to her and make a declaration of love. No one can know that better
than I who am his confidant, and who diligently maintains this exaltation so that
his effect upon Cordelia can be the greater. To let him confess his love is
nevertheless too risky. Although I know quite well she will refuse him, that will
not be the end of the affair. He will no doubt take it very much to heart. That
might move and touch Cordelia. Although in that event I need not fear the worst,
that she should change her mind, still, possibly her self-esteem might suffer
through this pure compassion. Should that happen, my plans concerning Edvard
are altogether wasted.
My relation to Cordelia is beginning to take a dramatic turn. Something must
happen, whatever it may be; I can no longer remain a mere observer without
letting the moment slip from me. She has to be surprised, that is necessary; but
to surprise her one must be on the alert. What would normally cause surprise
might have no effect on her. Really she has to be surprised in such a way that the
initial cause of the surprise is, to all intents and purposes, that something quite
ordinary happens. It has to appear gradually that there was something surprising
in it after all. This is always the law of the interesting, and the latter the law in
turn governing all my movements with regard to Cordelia. If only you know how
to surprise someone, you have always won the game; for a moment you suspend
the energy of the one concerned, make it impossible for her to act, and it makes
no difference whether one resorts to the ordinary or the extraordinary. I recall
with some satisfaction a foolhardy experiment upon a lady of distinguished
family. For some time I had been sneaking around her secretly looking for an
interesting form of contact, but in vain; then one day I met her on the street. I
was certain she didn’t know me or know I belonged here in town. She was
walking alone. I slipped past her so that I could meet her face to face. I stepped
aside for her; she kept to the flagstones. Just then I cast a sorrowful glance at her,
I think I almost had tears in my eyes. I took off my hat. She paused. In an
agitated voice and with a dreamy look, I said, ‘Do not be angry, gracious lady;
the resemblance between you and someone I love with all my soul, but who lives
far away from me, is so striking that you must forgive my strange behaviour.’
She thought me an extravagant dreamer, and a young girl can well put up with a
little extravagance, especially when she also feels her superiority and dares to
smile at one. Just so, she smiled, which became her indescribably. With
aristocratic condescension she bowed to me, and smiled. She resumed her walk.
I walked a few steps by her side. Some days later I met her; I presumed to greet
her. She laughed at me … Patience is a precious virtue, and he who laughs last
laughs best.
One could think of several ways of surprising Cordelia. I might try to raise an
erotic storm which was capable of tearing up trees by the roots. With its help I
could see if I could sweep her off her feet, snatch her from her historic setting,
and try in this agitation, by stealthy advances, to arouse her passion. It is not
inconceivable that it could be done. A girl with her passion can be made to do
anything at all. However, it would be wrong aesthetically. I am not fond of
giddiness, and the condition is to be recommended only with girls for whom this
is the only way of acquiring a poetic image. Besides, one misses the real
enjoyment, for too much confusion is also harmful. On her it will altogether fail
of its effect. I might imbibe in a couple of draughts what I could have had the
benefit of over a lengthy period, indeed, even worse, what with discretion I
might have enjoyed in a way that was fuller and richer. Cordelia is not to be
enjoyed in a state of exaltation. It might surprise her in the first instance were I
to behave in this way, but she would soon have had enough, precisely because
this surprise lay too near her daring soul.
A straightforward engagement is the best of all methods, the most expedient. If
she heard me making a prosaic declaration of love, likewise asking her for her
hand, she might believe her ears even less than if she listened to my heated
eloquence, imbibed my poisoned intoxicant, heard her heart throb at the thought
of an abduction.
The damnable thing with an engagement is always the ethical side. The ethical
is just as boring in life as it is in learning. What a difference! Beneath the sky of
the aesthetic everything is light, pleasant and fleeting; when ethics come along
everything becomes hard, angular, an unending ennui. Still, strictly, an
engagement has no ethical reality in the way marriage does; its validity is only
consensu gentium.
40 This ambiguity can be very useful to me. The ethical
element in it is just enough for Cordelia at some time to get the impression that
she is breaking normal barriers, but not so serious that I will have to fear more
critical repercussions. I have always had some respect for the ethical. I have
never promised a girl marriage, not even casually; if I seem to be doing so here,
it is only a pretence. I shall certainly contrive for her to be the one who breaks
off the engagement. My chivalrous pride scorns giving promises. I despise a
judge who tricks an offender into a confession with the promise of freedom. A
judge like that renounces his own power and ability. Besides, there is the fact
that I want nothing in my own practice that is not given freely, in the strictest
sense. Let common seducers use such methods! What do they achieve? Anyone
unable so to encompass a girl that she loses sight of everything he doesn’t want
her to see, so to poeticize his way into the girl that it is from her that everything
issues, just as he himself would wish it, is and will always be a bungler. I will
not envy him his pleasure. A bungler is what such a person is and remains, a
seducer, which no one could by any means call me. I am an aesthete, an eroticist,
who has grasped the nature and meaning of love, who believes in love and
knows it from the ground up. I only reserve to myself the private opinion that no
love affair should last more than six months at most, and that every relationship
is over as soon as one has tasted the final enjoyment. All this I know; I also
know that the highest form of enjoyment conceivable is to be loved, loved more
than everything in the world. To poeticize oneself into a girl is an art, to
poeticize oneself out of her a masterpiece. Yet the latter depends essentially on
the former.
Another method is possible. I could do everything to get her engaged to
Edvard. I would become a friend of the family. Edvard would trust me implicitly
– after all, I am the one to whom he as good as owes his happiness. In this way I
would be better concealed. No, it won’t do. She cannot become engaged to
Edvard without belittling herself in one way or another. Also, my relationship to
her would become more piquant than interesting. The endless prosaicness of an
engagement is precisely the sounding-board of the interesting.
Everything is taking on more meaning in the Wahl household. One clearly
notes that a hidden life is stirring beneath the daily routine, which must soon
proclaim itself in a corresponding revelation. The Wahl household is preparing
for an engagement. A mere outside observer might suppose there was to be a
match between me and the aunt. What an expansion of agronomic knowledge
might such a marriage achieve in a coming generation! I would then become
Cordelia’s uncle. I am a friend of freedom of thought and no thought is so absurd
that I lack courage to grasp hold of it. Cordelia fears a declaration of love from
Edvard, Edvard hopes it will decide everything. He may be sure of that. But to
spare him the unpleasant consequences of such a step, I shall try to steal a march
on him. I am hoping now to be rid of him soon; he really is in my way. I felt it
clearly today. Doesn’t he look so dreamy and love-drunk that he might suddenly
get up, like a somnambulist, and in front of the whole congregation confess his
love in such objective terms that he doesn’t even approach Cordelia? I looked
daggers at him today. I caught Edvard with my eyes, big as he is, as an elephant
catches something with its trunk, and threw him over backwards. Although he
remained seated in his chair I believe he felt something of the sort in his body.
Cordelia is not showing the same confidence towards me. She always
approached me with womanly assurance, now she is a little hesitant. But it is of
no great matter and it wouldn’t be too difficult for me to bring things back to the
old footing. But I won’t do that. Just one more exploration and then the
engagement. There can be no difficulties there; in her surprise Cordelia will say
yes, the aunt a hearty Amen, she will be beside herself with joy over such an
agronomic son-in-law. Son-in-law! How everything gets stuck together like peastraw once one ventures into this area! I don’t really become her son-in-law, only
her nephew, or rather, God willing, neither.
the 23rd
Today I harvested the fruit of a rumour I had spread, that I was in love with a
young girl. With Edvard’s help it has also reached the ears of Cordelia. She is
curious, she watches me, but she doesn’t dare ask; yet it is not unimportant to her
to be certain, partly because she finds it unbelievable, partly because she might
well see a precedent in this for herself; for if such a cold-blooded scoffer as
myself could fall in love, there need be no disgrace in her doing the same. Today
I brought up the subject. To tell a story in a way that the point doesn’t get lost, I
think I’m the man for that, likewise telling it in such a way that the point doesn’t
emerge too soon. Holding the listeners in suspense, ascertaining through their
small incidental movements what they want the outcome to be, putting them off
the track in the course of the narration, that’s what I like doing; using
ambiguities, so the listeners understand one thing by what is being said and then
suddenly notice that the words can be understood in another way, that’s my
métier. If what one wants is an opportunity for making certain observations, one
should always make a speech. In conversation it is easier for the other party to
escape, using questions and answers to hide the impression one’s words are
producing. In solemn earnest I began my speech to the aunt. ‘Am I to impute this
to the good-will of my friends or the malice of my enemies, and who hasn’t
more than enough of both?’ Here the aunt made a remark which I helped her to
spin out as well as I could so as to keep Cordelia, who was listening, in
suspense, a suspense she could not put an end to, since it was the aunt I was
talking to and my mood was serious. I continued: ‘Or am I to ascribe it to an
accident, a rumour’s generatio aequivoca’
41
(a word Cordelia evidently did not
understand – it only confused her, the more so because I put a false emphasis on
it and said it with a sly look as if that’s where the point lay), ‘that I who am used
to living a secluded life have become a talking-point by their insisting I am
engaged.’ Cordelia quite clearly still felt the need of my interpretation. I
continued: ‘My friends, since it must be considered a piece of good fortune to
fall in love’ (she started), ‘my enemies, since it would be thought quite laughable
for this fortune to fall to my lot’ (movement in the opposite direction); ‘or
accident, since there is not the slightest foundation for it; or rumour’s generatio
aequivoca, since the whole thing must have originated in an empty head’s
thoughtless self-communings.’ The aunt with true feminine curiosity lost no time
trying to find out who this lady might be with whom it had pleased gossip to
betroth me. Every question in this direction was waved aside. On Cordelia the
whole story made quite an impression; I rather think Edvard’s stock rose a few
points.
The decisive moment is nearing. I could address myself to the aunt, asking in
writing for Cordelia’s hand. This is indeed the customary procedure in affairs of
the heart, as if it were more natural for the heart to write than to speak. But it is
precisely its philistinism that would decide me to choose it. By doing so I would
miss the real surprise, and that I cannot give up. – If I had a friend he might say
to me, ‘Have you properly considered the very serious step you are taking, a step
that is decisive for all the rest of your life, and for another being’s happiness?’
That’s the advantage of having a friend. But I have none. Whether that is an
advantage I leave undecided; on the other hand I see it as an absolute advantage
to be free of his advice. Otherwise, in the strictest sense of the word, I have
certainly thought the whole matter through.
Now there is nothing on my side to prevent the engagement. I proceed
accordingly with my courting, though who could see it in me? Soon my humble
person will be seen from a higher standpoint. I cease being a person and become
– a match; yes, a good match, the aunt will say. It is the aunt I feel most sorry
for, for she loves me with so pure and upright an agronomic love, she practically
worships me as her ideal.
Now, I have made many declarations of love during my life, yet all my
experience is of no help at all here, for this declaration has to be made in a quite
special way. What I must mainly bring home to myself is that it is all just a
pretence. I have rehearsed several steps to find out which approach would be the
best. Making the moment erotic would be dubious, for it might well anticipate
what is to come later and ought to develop gradually. Making it very serious is
dangerous, for a moment like this is of such great significance for a girl that all
her soul may be focused on it, like a dying man’s on his last will. Making it
easy-going, slapstick, would not be in harmony with the disguise I have used up
to now, nor with the new one I plan to construct and adopt. Making it witty and
ironical is too risky. If my purpose were the same here as with people in general
on such occasions, where the main thing is to coax out the little ‘yes’, it would
be as easy as pie. This is indeed important for me but not absolutely, for although
I have now picked out this girl, although I have devoted much attention, indeed
all my interest, to her, there are still conditions on which I will not accept her
‘yes’. I am not at all interested in possessing the girl in an external sense, but in
enjoying her artistically. So the beginning must be as artistic as possible. The
beginning must be as vague as possible, an omnipossibility. If she straightaway
sees a deceiver in me she misunderstands me, for in an ordinary sense I am no
deceiver. If she sees in me a faithful lover she also misunderstands me. The thing
is that in this scene her soul must be as little predetermined as possible. In a
moment like this a girl’s soul is as prophetic as a dying man’s.
42 This must be
prevented. My lovely Cordelia! I am cheating you out of something beautiful,
but it cannot be otherwise, and I shall compensate you as best I can. The whole
episode must be kept as inconsequential as possible, so that when she has given
her ‘yes’, she is unable to throw the least light on what may be concealed in this
relationship. This infinite possibility is precisely the interesting. If she can
predict anything, then I have gone wrong and the whole relationship loses its
meaning. It is unthinkable that she should say ‘yes’ because she loves me, for
she does not love me at all. The best thing for me to do is transform the
engagement from an action into an event, from something she does into
something that happens to her, of which she can say, ‘God knows how it really
came about.’
the 31st
Today I have written a love-letter for a third party. This is a constant source of
pleasure. In the first place, it is always extremely interesting to enter so vividly
into the situation, yet in all possible comfort. I have my pipe filled, hear about
the relationship, the letters from the parties in question are produced. It is a
matter of constant interest to me how a young girl writes. The man sits there
now, infatuated as a rat, reading her letters aloud and interrupted by my laconic
remarks: she writes well, she has feeling, taste, caution, she has certainly been in
love before, etc. Secondly, it is a good deed. I am helping to bring a young
couple together. For every happy couple, I select one victim for myself. I make
two people happy, just one unhappy at most. I am honest and reliable, and have
never deceived anyone who has confided in me. There is always a little fun
among the leavings, after all that’s just legal fees. And why do I enjoy this trust?
Because I know Latin and attend to my studies, and because I always keep my
little affairs to myself. And don’t I deserve this confidence? After all, I never
abuse it.
August 2nd
The moment had arrived. I caught a glimpse of the aunt on the street, so I
knew she was not at home. Edvard was at the tolbooth. Accordingly there was
every likelihood that Cordelia was at home alone. And so it proved. She sat at
the work-table busy with a piece of sewing. Very rarely have I visited the family
before dinner, so she was a little disturbed at seeing me. The situation came close
to becoming too emotional. She wouldn’t have been to blame for that, for she
controlled herself quite easily, but I myself; for in spite of my armour she made
an unusually strong impression upon me. How charming she was in a bluestriped, simple calico house-dress, with a fresh-plucked rose on her bosom – a
fresh-plucked rose! no, the girl herself was like a freshly plucked flower, so fresh
she was, newly arrived; and who knows where a young girl spends the night? In
the land of illusions, I believe, but every morning she returns, hence her youthful
freshness. She looked so young and yet full-grown, as if Nature, like a tender
and copious mother, had just at that moment let her out of her hand. It was
almost as though I were witness to that farewell scene; I saw how that loving
mother embraced her once more in farewell, I heard her say, ‘Go out now into
the world, my child, I have done everything I can for you; take this kiss as a seal
on your lips, it is a seal that guards the sanctuary; no one can break it unless you
yourself wish it so, but when the right one comes, you will know him.’ And she
pressed a kiss on her lips, a kiss which did not, as a human kiss, take something
but was like a divine kiss that gives everything, that gives the girl the power of
the kiss. Marvellous Nature, how profound and mysterious you are! You give to
the man the word, and to the girl you give the eloquence of the kiss! This kiss
was upon her lips, and the farewell blessing on her forehead, and the joyous
salutation in her eyes; therefore she looked at once so much at home, for she was
after all the child of the house, but at the same time so much a stranger, for she
did not know the world but only her fond mother who watched invisibly over
her. She was really delightful, young as a child and yet adorned with that noble
maidenly dignity that inspires respect. – However, I was quickly dispassionate
again and solemnly unemotional, as is fitting when one wants to make
something significant occur in a way that makes it seem of no consequence.
After some general remarks, I moved a little nearer to her, and then got on with
my proposal. A person who speaks like a book is exceedingly boring to listen to;
sometimes, however, it is not inappropriate to talk in that way. For a book has
the remarkable property that it can be interpreted any way you wish. If one talks
like a book one’s conversation acquires this property too. I kept quite soberly to
the usual formulas. She was surprised, as I’d expected; that can’t be denied. To
describe to myself how she looked is difficult. She seemed multifaceted; yes just
about like the still to be published but announced commentary to my book, a
commentary capable of any interpretation. One word and she would have
laughed at me; another and she would have been moved; still another and she
would have shunned me; but no such word came to my lips. I remained solemnly
unemotional and kept to the ritual. – ‘She had known me for such a short time’,
dear God, it’s only on the strait path of engagement one meets such difficulties,
not on the primrose path of love.
Strangely enough, when pondering the matter the previous days, I was rather
hasty and quite sure that in the moment of surprise she would say yes. One sees
what all the preparation was good for, for that’s not how things turned out; she
said neither yes nor no but referred me to the aunt. I should have foreseen that.
But really I have luck on my side all the same, for this was an even better
outcome.
The aunt gives her consent. And I hadn’t entertained the slightest doubt about
that either. Cordelia follows her advice. As for my engagement, I do not brag
that it is poetic, it is extremely philistine and petty bourgeois in every way. The
girl does not know whether she should say yes or no, the aunt says yes, the girl
too says yes, I take the girl, she takes me – and now the story begins.
the 3rd
So I’m engaged; so is Cordelia, and I suppose that’s just about all she knows of
the matter. If she had a friend she could speak frankly with, she’d no doubt say,
‘What it all means I’ve really no idea. Something about him attracts me, but
what it is I can’t make out; he has a strange power over me; but love him, no, I
don’t, and perhaps never will; on the other hand I should certainly be able to
endure living with him and can therefore be very happy with him, for surely he
doesn’t ask too much if only one puts up with him.’ My dear Cordelia! perhaps
he demands more, and in return less endurance. – Of all ridiculous things,
engagement must be the most ridiculous of all. In marriage there’s at least
meaning, even though that meaning doesn’t suit me. An engagement is a purely
human invention and reflects no credit at all on its inventor. It is neither one
thing nor the other, and has as much to do with love as the strip hanging down
the beadle’s back has with a professor’s gown. I am now a member of this
honourable company. That is not without significance, for, as Trop says, it is
only by being an artist that one acquires the right to judge other artists. And is
not a fiancé also a Dyrehaug’s artist?
43
Edvard is beside himself with indignation. He is letting his beard grow and has
hung up his dark suit, which says a lot. He wants to speak with Cordelia, wants
to describe my deviousness to her. That will be a scandalous scene, Edvard
unshaven, negligently dressed, shouting at Cordelia. So long as he doesn’t cut
me out with his long beard. I try in vain to bring him to reason; I explain that it is
the aunt who has brought about the match, that maybe Cordelia still harbours
feelings for him, that I shall be willing to withdraw if he can win her. He
hesitates a moment, wonders whether he shouldn’t let his beard jut out in some
new fashion, buy a new dark suit; the next moment he is abusing me. I do
everything to keep up appearances with him. However angry he is with me, I am
certain he will take no step without consulting me; he doesn’t forget the
advantages of having me as mentor. And why should I take from him his last
hope, why break with him? He is a good man; who knows what the future may
bring?
What I must do now is, on the one hand, prepare everything for the breakingoff of the engagement, so as to ensure a more beautiful and more significant
relationship with Cordelia; and on the other, make use of the time as well as I
can to delight in all the lovableness that Nature has so abundantly equipped her
with, delight in it, though within the limits and with the circumspection that
prevents any anticipation. Then when I have brought it to the point of her
learning what it is to love, and to love me, the engagement breaks like an
imperfect mould and she is mine. Others get engaged when they reach this point,
and have good prospects of a boring marriage for all eternity. That’s their
business.
Everything is still status quo. But a fiancé could scarcely be more fortunate
than I, no miser who has found a gold piece could be more blissful. I am
intoxicated with the thought that she is in my power. A pure, innocent femininity,
as translucent yet as profound as the ocean, with no suspicion what love is! Now
she will learn what kind of power love is. Like a king’s daughter who is raised
from the dust to the throne of her forefathers, she shall now be installed in the
kingdom that is her own. And it is through me it will happen; she learns to love
me in learning to love; in extending her rule, the paradigm gradually increases,
and that is me. In feeling her whole significance to lie in love, she expends that
significance upon me, she loves me doubly. The thought of my joy is so
overwhelming that I almost take leave of my senses.
Her soul is not dissipated or slackened with love’s indeterminate stirrings,
something that prevents many girls from ever learning to love categorically,
energetically, totally. They have in their consciousness an indefinite, hazy picture
that is meant to be the ideal against which the actual object is to be tested. From
such half-measures emerges something which can help one along one’s Christian
way through the world. – As love now awakens in her soul, I look through it,
heed it as it emerges from her with all love’s voices. I ascertain what shape it has
taken in her and myself conform to it; and as I am already an immediate part of
the story, the love that courses through her heart, so I come to meet her once
more, from outside, as deceptively as possible. After all, a girl loves only once.
I am now in lawful possession of Cordelia, I have the aunt’s consent and
blessing, the congratulations of friends and relations. That should do it. Now all
the hardships of war are over, the blessings of peace begin. What tomfoolery! As
if the aunt’s blessing and the friends’ congratulations could in any real sense put
me in possession of Cordelia; as if love made such a contrast between wartime
and peace, and did not, as long as it lasts, proclaim itself rather in conflict,
however different the weapons. The difference is really whether it is fought
cominus or eminus.
44 The more the conflict in a love affair has been eminus, the
more it is to be deplored, for in that case the less significant the hand-to-hand
combat. To the latter belong the handclasp and the touching of the foot, both of
which, as we know, were as warmly recommended by Ovid as most jealously
disparaged, to say nothing of a kiss, an embrace.
45 Someone fighting eminus has
usually only his eye to rely on, yet if he is an artist he will be able to employ this
weapon with such virtuosity that he accomplishes almost the same. He will be
able to let his eye rest upon a girl with a desultory tenderness that affects her in
the same way as if he had accidentally touched her; he will be able to hold her as
firmly with his eye as if he held her in his embrace. It is always a mistake,
however, or a misfortune, to fight eminus for too long, for a fight of that kind is
not the enjoyment itself, always just an indication. It is only when one fights
cominus that everything assumes its true importance. When love stops fighting it
has come to an end. I have as good as not fought eminus at all, and am now
therefore not at the end but the beginning; I am bringing out my weapons. True, I
do possess her in a legal and petty bourgeois sense, but to me that means nothing
at all; I have far purer ideas. True, she is indeed engaged to me, but to infer from
this that she loved me would be a deception, for she isn’t in love at all. I have
lawful possession of her, yet I do not possess her as I might very well possess a
girl without having lawful possession.
Auf heimlich erröthender Wange
Leuchtet des Herzens Glühen.
46
She is sitting on the sofa by the tea-table, I in a chair by her side. This
positioning has confidentiality but also an exclusiveness that makes for distance.
So very much always depends on the positions; that is, for one who has an eye
for it. Love has many positionings; this is the first. How royally Nature has
endowed this girl, her pure soft contours, her deep feminine innocence, her clear
eyes – everything intoxicates me. – I have paid her my respects. She came
towards me cheerfully as usual, though a little embarrassed, a little uncertain; the
engagement ought after all to change our relationship, but she doesn’t know
how. She took my hand, but not with the usual smile. I returned the greeting with
a slight, almost imperceptible pressure on the hand; I was gentle and friendly
though without being amorous. – She is sitting on the sofa by the tea-table, I in a
chair by her side. A beautifying solemnity suffuses the situation, a soft morning
radiance. She is silent; nothing disturbs the stillness. My eye glides softly over
her, not with desire, that indeed would be shameless. A delicate, momentary
blush fleets over her, like a cloud over a meadow, rising and receding. What does
this blush mean? Is it love? Is it longing, hope, fear? Because the heart’s colour
is red? Not at all. She is surprised, she marvels – not at me, that would be too
little to offer her; she marvels not at herself but inside herself, she is transformed
within. This moment demands stillness, so no reflection must disturb it, no noise
of passion interrupt it. It is as though I were not present, and yet my presence is
precisely what furnishes the condition for this contemplative wonder of hers. My
being is in harmony with hers. In a condition like this, a young girl is to be
worshipped and adored, like some deities, in silence.
It is fortunate that I have my uncle’s house. If I wanted to give a young man a
distaste for tobacco, I would take him to one or other smoking-room at the
Regent’s.
47
If I want to give a young girl a distaste for being engaged, I need
only introduce her here. Just as in the tailors’ guildhall one looks only for tailors,
so one looks here only for engaged couples. It is a frightful company to fall into
and I cannot blame Cordelia for becoming impatient. When we are assembled en
masse I think we can muster ten couples, besides the supplementary battalions
that come to the capital on big festive occasions. Then we betrothed could really
enjoy the pleasures of betrothal. I meet with Cordelia at the alarm-post to give
her a distaste for these infatuated clinches, these journeyman’s bunglings. All
evening one constantly hears a sound as of someone going round with a flyswatter – it is the kiss of the lovers. There, is an amiable lack of constraint in this
house, one doesn’t seek out the dark corners; no! one sits around a big round
table. I make as if to submit Cordelia to the same treatment. For that I have to do
violence to myself. It would be really outrageous to let myself insult her
profound femininity in that manner. I would reproach myself for this more than
for deceiving her. In general, I can guarantee a perfect treatment, aesthetically, of
any girl who puts her trust in me: except that it ends in her being deceived; but
that is consistent with my aesthetics, for either the girl deceives the man or the
man deceives the girl. It would be quite interesting if one could get some literary
hack to find out in fairy stories, sagas, ballads and mythologies whether a girl is
more frequently unfaithful than a man.
I do not regret the time that Cordelia costs me, although it is considerable.
Every meeting requires, often, long preparation. With her I am witnessing the
birth of her love. I am myself as though present invisibly when sitting visibly by
her side. As when a dance which should really be danced by two is only danced
by one, that’s how my relation is to her. For I am the other dancer, but invisible.
She moves as though in a dream, yet she is dancing with another, and this other,
it is I who inasmuch as I am visibly present am yet invisible, inasmuch as I am
invisibly present am yet visible. The movements require another person: she
bows to him, she gives him her hand, she draws back, she draws near him again.
I take her hand, I complete her thought, which is nevertheless complete in itself.
She moves in the melody of her own soul, I am only the occasion for her
moving. I am not amorous, that would only awaken her; I am flexible, yielding,
impersonal, almost like a mood.
What as a rule do engaged couples talk about? As far as I know, they are busily
occupied in getting themselves mutually enmeshed in the tiresome connections
of the respective families. No wonder the erotic disappears. Unless one can make
the erotic the absolute in comparison with which all other history vanishes, one
should never get mixed up with loving, even if one marries ten times. If I have
an aunt called Mariane, an uncle called Christopher, a father who is a major, etc.,
all such public knowledge is irrelevant to the mysteries of love. Yes, even one’s
own past life is nothing. Usually a young girl hasn’t so much to report in this
respect; if she does, listening to her may be worth while, but not, as a rule,
loving. Personally, I am not looking for histories; I have more than enough of
them. I am looking for immediacy. That the individuals first exist for one another
in its instant is the eternal element in love.
A little trust must be awoken in her, or rather, a doubt must be removed. I am
not exactly one of those loving people for whom it is out of respect that they
love one another, marry one another, beget children with one another; yet I am
well aware that love, especially when passion is not yet aroused, requires of the
one concerned that he should not offend aesthetically against morality. In this
regard love has its own dialectic. Thus, while from the point of view of morality
my relation to Edvard is far more reprehensible than my behaviour to the aunt, it
would be much easier for me to justify the former to Cordelia than the latter.
Although she hasn’t said anything, I have nevertheless found it best to explain to
her the necessity of my acting in this way. The caution I have used flatters her
pride, the secrecy with which I have handled everything fascinates her. Certainly,
it might seem that I have already betrayed too much erotic refinement here, that I
shall contradict myself if I must later convey the idea that I have never loved
before, but that doesn’t matter. I am not afraid of contradicting myself so long as
she doesn’t notice it and I achieve what I want. Let scholarly disputants take
pride in avoiding all contradiction; a young girl’s life is too rich for there not to
be contradictions in it and so makes contradiction necessary.
She is proud and also has no real conception of the erotic. While she now
defers to me, to some extent, in spiritual respects, it is conceivable that when the
erotic begins to assert itself, she may take it into her head to turn her pride
against me. As far as I can see, she is confused about what it really means to be a
woman. That is why it was easy to arouse her pride against Edvard. This pride
was quite eccentric, however, because she had no conception of love. If she
acquires it, then she acquires her true pride. But a residue of the eccentric pride
could remain. Conceivably she might then turn against me. Although she will
not regret having agreed to the engagement, nevertheless it will be clear to her
that I made a rather good bargain; she will realize that the beginning was
improperly effected on her part. If this should dawn on her, she will venture to
defy me. That’s how it should be. I shall know then for certain how deeply
moved she is.
Sure enough. Already, far down the street, I see this delightful little curly head
stretching out of the window as far as it can. This is the third day I’ve noticed it
… A young girl certainly doesn’t stand at the window for nothing, she
presumably has her own good reasons … But for heaven’s sake, I beg you, don’t
stretch out so far; I bet you are standing on the stretcher of the chair, I can tell
from the posture. Think how terrible it would be to fall on your head – not on
me, for I’m staying out of this affair for the time being, but on him, him, yes,
after all there must be a him … No, what do I see over there? If it isn’t my friend
licenciate Hansen walking down the middle of the street. There’s something
unusual in his appearance, the method of transportation is unaccustomed; if I’m
right he approaches on the wings of longing. Can it be that he has the run of this
house? And without my knowledge? … My pretty miss, you have disappeared; I
imagine you have gone down to open the door for his reception … You might as
well come back, he is not coming to your house at all … How do I know that? I
can assure you … he said so himself. If the wagon that went past hadn’t been so
noisy you could have heard it yourself. I said to him, quite casually you
understand, ‘Are you going in here?’ To which he replied no, in so many words
… You might as well say goodbye, for now the licenciate and I are going for a
walk. He is embarrassed, and embarrassed people tend to be talkative. So I shall
talk to him about the living he is applying for … goodbye, my pretty miss, we
are going now to the tolbooth. When we get there I shall say to him, ‘Well,
damned if you haven’t taken me out of my way, I should be up on Vestergade.’ –
Look, now we’re here again … what faithfulness, she’s still standing at the
window. A girl like that should make a man happy … And why then, you ask, do
I do all this? Because I’m a mean-hearted man who delights in teasing others?
Not at all. I do it out of concern for you, my amiable miss. In the first place, you
have waited for the licenciate, yearned for him, so now when he arrives he is
doubly handsome. Secondly, when he comes in the door now, he says, ‘Heavens!
We were nearly caught, that damned man was standing there at the door just as I
was going to visit you. But I was smart, I got him involved in a long chat about
the call I’m applying for, and walked him up and down and in the end as far as
the tolbooth; I give you my word, he noticed nothing.’ And so? Well, you are
even more fond of the licentiate than before, you always thought he had an
excellent mind, but that he was smart… well, now you can see for yourself. And
you have me to thank for that. – But something occurs to me. Your engagement
can’t have been announced, otherwise I’d know about it. The girl is delicious
and a joy to behold, but she is young. Perhaps her insight is not yet mature. Isn’t
it conceivable that she might go and take a very serious step thoughtlessly? It
must be prevented, I must speak to her. I owe her that, for she is certainly a very
amiable girl. I owe it to the licentiate, for he is my friend. And as for that, I owe
it to her because she is my friend’s intended. I owe it to her family, for it is no
doubt a very respectable one. I owe it to the whole human race, for it is a good
deed. The whole human race! Great thought, inspiring achievement, to act in the
name of the whole human race, to possess such general power of attorney! – But
now for Cordelia. I can always make use of mood, and the girl’s beautiful
yearning has really affected me.
So now begins the first war with Cordelia, in which I take to my heels and so
teach her to triumph in her pursuit of me. I keep on retreating, and in this
backward movement I teach her to recognize in me all the powers of love, its
uneasy thoughts, its passion, what longing is, and hope and restless expectation.
By my putting on this show for her, all this develops correspondingly in her. It is
a triumphal procession that I lead her into, and I am as much the dithyrambic
singer of paeans in praise of her victory as I am the one who shows the way. She
will gain the courage to believe in love, to believe it is an eternal power, when
she sees its dominion over me, sees my movements. She will believe me, partly
because I count on my art, partly because at the bottom of what I do there is
truth. If it were not so, she would not believe me. With every movement of mine
she becomes stronger and stronger; love awakens in her soul, she is initiated into
the meaning of her womanhood. – Up to now, in the petty-bourgeois sense, I
have not proposed to her personally; I do it now, I set her free;
48 only thus will I
love her. She must never suspect that she owes it to me, for then she loses her
self-confidence. It is when she feels free, so free that she is almost tempted to
break with me, that the second conflict begins. She has power and passion now,
and the conflict has importance for me whatever the immediate consequences.
Suppose her pride makes her giddy, suppose she breaks with me; well, then, she
has her freedom, but she is going to belong to me nevertheless. Of course, it is
tomfoolery that the engagement should bind her; I want only to own her in her
freedom. Let her leave me, the second conflict will begin all the same, and in the
second conflict I shall triumph as surely as it was an illusion that she triumphed
in the first. The greater the power in her, the more there is in it for me. The first
war is the war of liberation, it is a game; the second is a war of conquest, it is a
matter of life and death.
Do I love Cordelia? Yes! Genuinely? Yes! Faithfully? Yes! – in an aesthetic
sense, and surely even that means something. What good would it do this girl if
she fell into the hands of a numbskull of a faithful husband? What would
become of her? Nothing. It is said that loving such a girl takes rather more than
honesty. I have that more – it is duplicity. And still I love her faithfully. Sternly
and temperately I keep myself in check, so that everything there is in her, all her
divinely rich nature, is allowed to unfold. I am one of the few that can do that,
she one of the few who are fit for it; are we then not suited to each other?
Is it wrong of me, instead of looking at the priest, to fix my eye on the
beautiful embroidered handkerchief you hold in your hand? Is it wrong of you to
hold it that way? … It has a name in the corner … Charlotte Hahn, is that what
you are called? It is so seductive to learn a lady’s name in such an accidental
manner. It is as if there were a willing spirit who mysteriously made me
acquainted with you … Or is it not an accident that the handkerchief was folded
just right for me to see your name? … You are troubled, you dry a tear from your
eye, the handkerchief hangs down loosely again … It is obvious to you that I am
looking at you, not at the preacher. You look at the handkerchief, you realize it
has betrayed your name … It is really a very innocent matter: it is easy to get to
know a girl’s name … Why take it out on the handkerchief, why should it be
crumpled up? Why be angry with it? Why be angry with me? Listen to what the
priest says: ‘No one should lead a man into temptation; even one who does so
without knowing has a responsibility, he too owes a debt to the other, a debt he
can discharge only by greater good-will’ … Now he has said Amen. Outside the
church door there’s nothing to stop the handkerchief fluttering loosely in the
wind … or have you become afraid of me? What have I done? … Have I done
more than you can forgive, than you dare remember – in order to forgive?
A double movement will be needed for Cordelia. If all I do is constantly
withdraw before her superior strength, the erotic in her might well become too
diffuse and relaxed for the deeper womanliness to hypostatize itself. Then, when
the second conflict begins, she would be unable to offer resistance. She may
certainly sleep her way to victory, indeed that’s what she must do; on the other
hand she must be constantly awakened. So when it seems to her for a moment as
though her victory were wrested from her again, she must learn to want to keep
hold of it. In this wrestling her womanliness is matured. I could either use
conversation to inflame and letters to cool, or conversely. The latter alternative is
in every way preferable. I can then enjoy her most extreme moments. When she
has received an epistle, when its sweet poison has been absorbed into her blood,
a word is enough to make the love erupt. The next moment my irony and iciness
put her in doubt, yet not so much that she cannot constantly feel her victory, feel
it increased on receipt of the next the epistle. Nor is irony so easy to deploy in a
letter, without running the risk of her not understanding it. It is only in small
glimpses that ardour can be deployed in conversation. My personal presence will
prevent the ecstasy. When I am there only in a letter, she can easily stand up to
me, she to some extent confuses me with a universal being who lives in her love.
Also, in a letter it is easier to let oneself go; in a letter I can very well throw
myself at her feet, etc., something that would very likely look nonsensical were I
actually to do it, and the illusion would be destroyed. The contradiction in these
movements will evoke and develop, strengthen and consolidate the love in her,
in a word, tempt it. –
Yet these letters mustn’t assume too soon a strongly erotic tone. To begin with
it is best they bear a more universal imprint, contain a hint or two, remove a
doubt or two. There can also be the occasional suggestion of the advantage an
engagement has, inasmuch as it enables one to keep people away through
mystification. What imperfections it otherwise has there will be no lack of
opportunity to observe. I can keep up, in my uncle’s house, the continual
accompaniment of a caricature. The eroticism of the heart she cannot evoke
without my help. When I deny it and let this caricature torment her, she will
become wearied of being engaged soon enough, yet without really being able to
say that it is I who have wearied her of it.
A little epistle today will give her a hint of the taste of her soul by describing
the state of my own. That’s the right method. And method is what I have; for that
I can thank you dear young girls whom I have loved before. I owe it to you that
my soul is so attuned that I can be whatever I wish to Cordelia. I remember you
gratefully, the honour is yours; I shall always admit that a young girl is a born
teacher from whom it is always possible to learn, if nothing else, how to deceive
her – for that’s something best learnt from the girls themselves. No matter how
old I become, I shall never forget that a man is only finished when he is too old
to learn anything from a young girl.
My Cordelia!
You say that you hadn’t imagined me like this, but nor did I imagine I could be
like this. Isn’t the change rather in you? Might it not really be that it wasn’t I that
had changed but the eye with which you see me. It is in me because I love you,
in you because it is you that I love. With the cold, calm light of reason I
surveyed everything, proud and unmoved, nothing made me afraid, nothing took
me by surprise, even if the spirit had knocked at my door I’d have calmly taken
up the candelabrum in order to open it.
49 But there, it wasn’t ghosts I opened the
door to, not pale, powerless figures, it was you, my Cordelia, it was life and
youth and beauty that came to meet me. My arm trembles, I cannot hold the light
steady, I back away from you, unable, however, to take my eyes off you, unable
not to wish I could hold the light still. Yes, I am changed, but to what, in what
way, in what does this change consist? I don’t know, I don’t know what further
description to add, what richer predicate to use than this, when infinitely
enigmatically I say of myself: I am changed.
Your Johannes
My Cordelia!
Love loves secrecy – an engagement is a revelation; it loves silence – an
engagement is a public announcement; it loves whispering – an engagement is a
loud-voiced proclamation. Yet with my Cordelia’s art, an engagement will be
just what is needed for deceiving the foe. On a dark night there is nothing more
dangerous for other ships than to hang out a lamp more deceptive than the
darkness.
Your Johannes
She’s sitting on the sofa by the tea-table, I sit by her side; she’s holding my
arm, her head rests on my shoulder, weighed down by many thoughts. She is so
near, yet so distant. She gives herself up to me, yet does not belong to me. There
is still resistance, but not consciously so; it is the usual resistance of
womanhood, for woman’s nature is submission in the form of resistance. – She’s
sitting on the sofa by the tea-table, I sit by her side. Her heart is throbbing but
without passion, her bosom moves but not in disquiet, at times her colouring
changes but in easy transitions. Is this love? Not at all. She listens, she
understands. She heeds the winged word, she understands it; she listens to what
another says, she understands it as though it were something she herself had
said; she heeds the voice of another as it echoes inside her; she understands this
echo as though it were her own voice issuing forth both to her and to another.
What am I doing? Am I deluding her? Not at all, that would be no use. Am I
stealing her heart? Not at all, I would sooner make sure that the girl I loved kept
her heart. Then what am I doing? I am fashioning for myself a heart in the
likeness of her own. An artist paints his beloved, that’s his pleasure; a sculptor
forms her. That’s what I am doing too, but in a spiritual sense. She doesn’t know
I possess this picture, and that is really where my duplicity lies. I have got hold
of it secretly, and in that sense I have stolen her heart, as Rebecca is said to have
stolen Laban’s heart when she deviously defrauded him of his household gods.
50
The setting and frame have, after all, a great influence on one, are part of what
is stamped most firmly and deeply on the memory, or rather on one’s whole soul,
and are therefore never forgotten. However old I get, I will never be able to think
of Cordelia in other surroundings than this little room. When I come to visit her,
the maid generally lets me in from the hall; Cordelia comes in from her room
and she opens her door just as I open the door to enter the drawing-room, so our
eyes meet straightaway at the doorway. The drawing-room is small, comfortable,
hardly more than a closet. Although I have seen it now from many different
angles, what I’m most fond of is the view from the sofa. She sits there by my
side; in front of me stands a round tea-table, over which a tablecloth is draped in
rich folds. On the table stands a lamp, shaped like a flower, which shoots up,
vigorous and full-bodied, to bear its crown, over which in turn a delicately cut
paper shade hangs down, so lightly that it can never stay still. The lamp’s shape
reminds me of oriental nature, the movements of the shade of the gentle breezes
in those parts. The floor is covered with a carpet woven from some kind of osier,
a piece of work that immediately betrays its foreign origin. At times I let the
lamp become the motif for my landscape. I’m sitting there, with her outstretched
on the ground, under the lamp’s flower. At other times I let the osier rug evoke
the idea of a ship, of an officer’s cabin – we are sailing out into the middle of the
great ocean. When we sit far away from the window, we are gazing straight into
heaven’s vast horizon. This too adds to the illusion. Then when I sit by her side,
I let these things appear like a picture fleeting swiftly over reality, as death walks
over one’s grave. The setting is always of great importance, especially for
memory’s sake. Every erotic relationship should be lived in such a way that one
can easily conjure up an image which possesses all of its beauty. To succeed, in
this, one must pay particular attention to the setting. If one doesn’t find the
setting one wants, it has to be come by. In the case of Cordelia and her love the
setting fits perfectly. What a different picture comes to mind when I think of my
little Emilie, and yet again, how suitable the setting! I can’t imagine her except
in the little garden room, or rather it is only there that I want to remember her.
The doors stood open, a small garden in front of the house obstructed the view,
forcing the eye to stop there, to pause before the boldly trodden highway which
disappeared into the distance. Emilie was delightful, but more insignificant than
Cordelia. The setting was also made for that. The eye remained earthbound, it
did not rush boldly and impatiently on, it rested on this little foreground; as for
the highway, even though it lost itself romantically in the distance, its effect was
more to make the eye traverse the stretches that lay before one, and turn back to
this garden in order to traverse the same distance once again. The apartment was
on earth. Cordelia’s setting must have no foreground, but the infinite boldness of
the horizon. She must not be on earth, but float, not walk but fly, not to and fro,
but everlastingly onward.
When one gets engaged, one is initiated immediately into all of engagement’s
humbug. Some days ago licenciate Hansen turned up with the attractive young
girl he has become engaged to. He confided to me that she was a delight, I knew
that already; he confided to me that she was very young, I knew that too; finally
he confided to me that it was for that very reason he had chosen her, to fashion
her into the ideal which had always floated before his eyes. Heavens above! such
a silly licenciate – and a healthy, blooming, joyous girl. Now, I am a fairly old
practitioner, yet I never draw near a young girl other than as to Nature’s
venerabile and learn first from her. In so far as I may then have any educative
influence on her, it is by teaching her again and again what I have learned from
her.
Her soul must be moved in all possible directions, not piecemeal, however, and
in sudden gusts, but totally. She must discover the infinite, and find out that this
is what comes most naturally to a human being. She must discover this not by
way of thought – for her that is a detour – but in imagination, which is the real
means of communication between her and me; for what in man is part, in the
woman is the whole. Not for her to work her way towards the infinite along the
laborious path of thought, for the woman is not born to toil; it is along the gentle
path of the heart and imagination that she must grasp it. For a young girl, the
infinite is as natural as the idea that all love must be happy. Everywhere, in
whichever direction she turns, a young girl is surrounded by infinitude; the
transition is a leap, but bear in mind that it is a womanly leap, not a manly one.
Why are men generally so clumsy? When they are about to leap they first take a
little run-up, make lengthy preparations, measure the distance with the eye, take
several running starts, then get afraid and turn back again. Finally they leap and
don’t make it. A young girl leaps in a different way. In mountain regions one
often comes across two towering peaks. A yawning chasm separates them,
terrible to gaze down into. No man dares this leap. A young girl, however, so the
local inhabitants say, has dared it, and it is called the Maiden’s Leap. I am
prepared to believe it, as I believe everything remarkable about a young girl, and
for me it is an intoxicant to hear the simple inhabitants speaking of it. I believe
everything, believe the miraculous, am amazed at it simply in order to believe;
just as the only thing that has astonished me in the world is a young girl, the
first; and it will be the last. And yet a leap like that for a young girl is only a
jump, while a man’s leap will always be ridiculous because, however long his
stride, his exertion is as nothing compared with the distance between the peaks,
though it offers a kind of yardstick. But who could be fool enough to imagine a
young girl taking a run-up? Certainly one can imagine her running, but then the
running is itself a game, an enjoyment, an unfolding of grace, while the idea of a
run-up separates what in a woman go together. For a run-up has the dialectical in
it, and that is contrary to woman’s nature. And now the leap; who dares be so
ungracious as to separate here what go together? Her leap is an effortless
floating. And when she reaches the other side, she stands there again, not
exhausted by exertion, but more than usually beautiful, fuller in her soul, she
throws a kiss over to us who stand on this side. Young, new-born, like a flower
sprung up from the roots of the mountain, she swings out over the abyss, so that
we almost turn giddy. – What she must learn is to make all the movements of
infinitude, to rock to and fro, to lull herself into moods, to exchange poesy and
reality, truth and romance, to be tossed about in infinity. Then when she is
familiar with this tumult, I put the erotic in place, and she becomes what I wish
and desire. Then my good turn is done, my labour; I take in all my sails, I sit by
her side, it is under her sail we journey on. And truly, when this girl is first
erotically intoxicated, I shall have enough to do in sitting at the helm to
moderate the speed, so that nothing comes too early, nor in an unpleasing
manner. Once in a while I puncture a little hole in the sail, and the next moment
we are foaming along once more.
In my uncle’s house Cordelia becomes more and more indignant. Several times
she has proposed that we do not go there again. It’s no use, I always know how
to hit upon subterfuges. Last night when we left she pressed my hand with
unusual passion. She had presumably really felt pained by being there, and no
wonder. If I didn’t always derive amusement from observing the unnatural
products of their artifice I couldn’t possibly endure it. This morning I received a
letter from her in which, with more wit than I had given her credit for, her with,
she ridicules engagements. I kissed the letter; it is the most precious I have
received from her. Just so, my Cordelia! That’s how I want it.
By a remarkable coincidence there are two confectioners on Østergade
opposite each other. On the first floor on the left lives a little young lady, or
lady’s maid. She usually hides behind a Venetian blind which covers the
windowpane where she sits. The blind is made of very thin material, and anyone
who knows the girl or has seen her often will easily be able, if he has good eyes,
to make out every feature; while to anyone who doesn’t know her and does not
have good eyes, she appears as a dark shadow. The latter is to some extent the
case with me, the former that of a young officer who can be seen in the offing
every day precisely at noon and who looks up at this blind. Really what first
drew my attention to this beautiful telegraphic situation was the fact that there
are no blinds on the remaining windows; a solitary blind like this, covering just
one pane, is usually a sign that someone is sitting behind it. One forenoon I
stood at the window in the confectioner’s over on the other side. It was just
twelve o’clock. Without paying attention to the passers-by, I stood looking
fixedly at this blind, when suddenly the dark shadow behind it began to move. A
female head appeared in profile at the next pane, so that it turned, strangely, in
the direction in which the blind was facing. Thereupon the owner of the head
nodded in a very friendly manner and hid herself again behind the blind. First of
all, I inferred that the person she greeted was a man, for her movement was too
excited to be evoked by the sight of a girl friend; secondly, I inferred that the
person the greeting was meant for usually came from the other direction. For
then she had positioned herself quite correctly so as to see him well in advance,
indeed to greet him while still concealed by the blind. – Quite right, at twelve
precisely comes the hero in this little love scene, our dear lieutenant. I’m sitting
in the confectioner’s which is on the ground floor of the building whose first
floor is occupied by the young lady. The lieutenant has already caught sight of
her. Careful now, my friend, it isn’t so easy to bow gracefully to a first floor.
Well, he’s not so bad really; well-grown, erect, a handsome figure, arched nose,
dark hair, the tricorn suits him. Now for the dilemma. The knees begin to chatter
just a little from standing too long. Its impression on the eye can be compared to
the feeling one has when one has toothache and the teeth become too long in the
mouth. If you gather all your strength in the eye and direct it at the first floor,
you take a little too much energy from the legs. Excuse me, lieutenant, for
resting that glance on its Ascension. Yes, I know quite well, it’s an impertinence.
One can hardly call the glance meaningful, meaningless rather, yet very
promising. But these many promises clearly go too much to his head; he totters,
to use the poet’s words about Agnete, he sways, he falls.
51 That’s rough, and if
you ask me, it should never have happened. He’s too good for that. Really it’s
fatal, for if you want to impress the ladies as a gallant you must never fall down.
If you want to be a gallant you must watch out for things like that. But if you
want to appear merely as someone of intelligence, all this is of no consequence;
one slumps, one collapses, if one should then actually fall, there is nothing
remarkable about that. – What impression can this incident have made on my
little lady? It is unfortunate that I cannot be on both sides of the Dardanelles at
once. I could of course have an acquaintance posted on the other side, but on the
one hand, I always like to make my own observations, and on the other, one can
never tell what there might be in this story for me, and in that case it is never
good to have a confidant, since one then has to waste time getting out of him
what he knows and confusing him. – Really I am beginning to grow tired of my
good lieutenant. Day after day he comes by in full uniform. How terribly
unflinching! Is that kind of thing fitting for a soldier? My dear sir, don’t you
carry a sword or a bayonet? Shouldn’t you take the house by storm and the girl
by force? Yes, if you were a student, a licentiate, a curate living on hope,
52
it
would be different. Still, I forgive you, for the girl pleases me the more I look at
her. She is pretty, her brown eyes are full of mischief. When she waits for your
arrival her appearance glows with a heightened beauty that is indescribably
becoming. I infer from this that she must have a great deal of imagination, and
imagination is the natural rouge of the fair sex.
My Cordelia!
What is longing [Længsel]? Language and the poets rhyme it with the word
‘prison’ [Fængsel]. How absurd! As though only someone sitting in gaol could
long for something. As if one couldn’t long for something when one is free! If I
were set free, would I not long? But then, of course, I am free, free as a bird, but
how much I long! I long when I am on my way to you; I long when I leave you,
I long for you even when I sit by your side. Can one long for what one has? Yes,
when you consider that the next moment you may not have it. My longing is an
eternal impatience. Only after living through all eternity and assuring myself that
you were mine every instant, only then would I return to you and live with you
through all eternity, and no doubt not have patience enough to be separated from
you for an instant without longing, but assurance enough to sit calmly at your
side.
Your Johannes
My Cordelia!
Outside the door stands a cabriolet, for me bigger than all the world, since it is
large enough for two, hitched to a pair of horses, wild and unmanageable as
natural forces, impatient as my passions, bold as your thoughts. If it’s your wish,
I shall carry you off – my Cordelia! Is it your command? Your command is the
password that loosens the reins and sets free flight’s desire. I carry you off, not
from one lot of people to another, but out of the world – the horses rear, the
chaise rises; the horses stand almost vertically over us; we drive heavenwards
through the clouds, the wind roars about us; is it we who sit still and the whole
world that is moving, or is it our bold flight? Does it make you giddy, dear
Cordelia? Then hold on to me; I shall not be giddy. When one thinks only of one
thing, one never becomes giddy in a spiritual sense, and I am thinking only of
you – nor in a bodily sense, for I look only at you. Hold tight: if the world
perished, if our light carriage disappeared beneath us, we would still hold each
other in our embrace, floating in the harmony of the spheres.
Your Johannes
It’s almost too much. My servant has waited six hours, I myself, two, in wind
and rain, just to be on the lookout for that dear child, Charlotte Hahn. There is an
old aunt of hers she usually visits every Wednesday between two and five. Today
she doesn’t come, just when I wanted so much to see her. And why? Because she
puts me in a quite special mood. I greet her, she curtsies in a way at once
indescribably earthly yet heavenly; she almost stands still, it’s as though she was
about to sink into the earth, yet her look is as of one who could be raised up to
heaven. When I look at her, my mind becomes at once solemn yet covetous.
Otherwise, the girl does not interest me in the least. All I demand is this greeting,
nothing more even if she were willing to give it. Her greeting puts me in a mood
which I then lavish on Cordelia. – And yet I’ll bet that some way or another she
has given us the slip. It is difficult, not just in comedies but in real life too, to
keep track of a young girl; one needs an eye in every finger. There was a nymph,
Cardea, who meddled in fooling men. She lived in woods, lured her lovers into
the thickest brush, and vanished. She wanted to fool Janus too, but he fooled her,
for he had eyes in the back of his head.
53
My letters do not fail of their purpose. They are developing her mentally, if not
erotically. For that I have to use notes. The more prominent the erotic becomes,
the shorter the notes will be, but all the more certain to grasp the erotic point.
Nevertheless, in order not to make her sentimental or soft, irony stiffens her
feelings again, but also gives her an appetite for the nourishment most dear to
her. The notes give distant and vague hints of the highest. The moment this
presentiment begins to dawn in her soul, the relationship fractures. Through my
resistance, the presentiment takes shape in her soul as though it were her own
thought, her own heart’s inclination. It’s just what I want.
My Cordelia!
Somewhere in town there lives a little family consisting of a widow and three
daughters. Two of these go to the Royal Kitchens to learn to cook. It is spring,
about five one afternoon, the drawing-room door opens softly, a reconnoitring
glance looks about the room. There is no one, just a young girl sitting at the
piano. The door is ajar so one can listen unnoticed. It is no artist playing, for
then the door would have been shut. She is playing a Swedish melody, about the
ephemeral quality of youth and beauty. The words mock the girl’s own youth
and beauty; the girl’s youth and beauty mock the words. Which of them is right,
the girl or the words? The tones are so quiet, so melancholy, as though sadness
were the arbitrator who would settle the dispute. – But it is wrong, this sadness!
What association is there between youth and reflections of this kind, what
fellowship between morning and evening? The keys vibrate and tremble, the
spirits of the sounding-board rise in confusion and do not understand one another
– my Cordelia, why so vehement! To what end this passion?
How far removed in time must an event be for us to remember it? How far for
memory’s longing to be no longer able to seize it? Most people have a limit in
this respect: what lies too near them in time they cannot remember, nor what lies
too remote. I know no limit. What was experienced yesterday, I push back a
thousand years in time, and remember it as if it were yesterday.
Your Johannes
My Cordelia!
I have a secret to confide to you, my confidante. Who should I confide it to?
To Echo? She would betray it. To the stars? They are cold. People? They do not
understand. Only to you can I confide it, for you know how to safeguard it.
There is a girl, more beautiful than my soul’s dream, purer than the light of the
sun, deeper than the source of the ocean, more proud than the flight of the eagle
– there is a girl – oh! bend your head to my ear and my words, that my secret
may steal into it – this girl I love more dearly than my life, for she is my life;
more dearly than all my desires, for she is the only one; more dearly than all my
thoughts, for she is the only one; more warmly than the sun loves the flower,
more intensely than sorrow the privacy of the troubled mind; more longingly
than the desert’s burning sand loves the rain – I cling to her more tenderly than
the mother’s eye to the child, more confidingly than the pleading soul to God,
more inseparably than the plant to its root. – Your head grows heavy and
thoughtful, it sinks down on your breast, your bosom rises to its aid – my
Cordelia! You have understood me, you have understood me exactly, to the
letter, not one jot have you ignored! Shall I stretch the membrane of my ear and
let your voice assure me of this? Should I doubt? Will you safeguard this secret?
Can I depend on you? One hears of people who, in terrible crimes, dedicate
themselves to mutual silence. I have confided to you a secret which is my life
and my life’s content. Have you nothing to confide to me, nothing so beautiful,
so significant, so chaste, that supernatural forces would be set in motion if it
were betrayed?
Your Johannes
My Cordelia!
The sky is overcast – it is furrowed with dark rain-clouds, like dark brows
above its passionate countenance; the trees in the forest stir, unsettled by
troubled dreams. You have vanished from me in the forest. Behind every tree I
see a womanly being that resembles you; when I get nearer, it hides behind the
next tree. Won’t you reveal yourself to me, not gather yourself together?
Everything is in confusion before me; the single parts of the forest lose their
separate outlines, I see everything as a sea of fog, where womanly beings
resembling you everywhere appear and disappear. But you I do not see, you are
always moving on the waves of intuition, and yet even every single resemblance
of you makes me happy. What is the reason? – Is it the rich unity of your being
or the impoverished multiplicity of mine? – Is not loving you to love a world?
Your Johannes
It would really be interesting, if it were possible, to keep an exact record of my
conversations with Cordelia. But I see very clearly that it is not possible. For
even if I managed to remember every word exchanged between us, it would still
be impossible to convey the contemporaneity that is really the nerve of our
conversation, the element of surprise in the outburst, the animation that is
conversation’s life-principle. Nor, as a rule, of course, have I prepared myself,
which would also go against the real nature of conversation, particularly erotic
conversation. All that I have constantly in mind is the content of my letters, and
constantly in view the mood these might possibly evoke in her. Naturally, it
could never occur to me to ask her if she had read my letter. I can easily prove to
myself that she has read it. Nor do I ever talk to her of this directly, but keep up a
secretive communication with the letters in my conversations, partly to implant
some impression or other more deeply in her soul, partly to take it away from her
again and leave her undecided. Then she can read the letter again and get a new
impression from it, and so on.
A change has taken place in her, and is taking place. Were I to describe the
state of her soul at this moment, I would call it pantheistic daring. Her glance
betrays it straightaway. It is bold, almost foolhardy in its expectation, as if every
instant it demanded and was prepared to behold the supernatural. Like an eye
that sees beyond itself, this glance travels beyond what appears immediately
before it and beholds the marvellous. It is bold, almost foolhardy in its
expectation but not in its self-confidence; it is therefore something dreaming and
imploring, not proud and commanding. She seeks the marvellous outside herself,
she prays for it to appear, as if it was not in her own power to evoke it. This must
be prevented, otherwise I shall gain the ascendancy over her too soon. She said
to me yesterday that there was something regal in my nature. Perhaps she wants
to submit; that won’t do at all. Certainly, my dear Cordelia, there is something
regal in my nature, but you have no idea what kind of kingdom it is I rule over. It
is over the storms of moods. Like Aeolus, I keep them shut up in my personal
mountain and let now one, now another, go forth.
54 Flattery will give her selfesteem; the difference between mine and thine will become effective; everything
is placed on her side. To flatter requires great caution. At times one must set
oneself up very high but in a way that leaves room for a place still higher; at
times one must set oneself down very low. The former is the more correct in
moving in the direction of the spiritual, the latter in moving towards the erotic. –
Does she owe me anything? Nothing at all. Could I wish that she did? Not at all.
I am too much a connoisseur, and know the erotic too well, for any such
tomfoolery. If that were actually the case, I should endeavour with all my might
to make her forget it, and hush my own thoughts about it to sleep. In relation to
the labyrinth of her heart, every young girl is an Ariadne; she owns the thread by
which one can find one’s way through it, but she owns it without herself
knowing how to use it.
55
My Cordelia!
Speak – I obey. Your wish is my command. Your prayer is an all-powerful
invocation, your every fleeting wish my benefaction; for I obey you not as an
obliging spirit, as though I stood outside you. When you command, your will
takes shape, and with it myself, for I am a confusion of soul that simply awaits
your word.
Your Johannes
My Cordelia!
You know I am very fond of talking to myself. In myself I have found the most
interesting of my acquaintances. I have sometimes feared that I might come to
lack topics for these conversations of mine; now I have no fear, now I have you.
I talk, then, to myself, now and to all eternity about you, about the most
interesting subject to the most interesting person – alas! for I am only an
interesting person, you the most interesting subject.
Your Johannes
My Cordelia!
You think it is such a short time I have loved you; you seem almost afraid that
I may have loved someone before. There is a certain kind of handwriting in
which the well-favoured eye immediately suspects an older hand, which in the
course of time has been supplanted by empty foolishness. With corrosive
chemicals this later writing is erased and the original then stands out plain and
clear. Similarly, your eye has taught me, within myself, to find myself; I let
oblivion consume all that has nothing to do with you, and then I discover an
ancient, a divinely young, elemental hand; I discover that my love for you is as
old as myself.
Your Johannes
My Cordelia!
How can a kingdom stand which is divided against itself?
56 How am I going to
be able to keep going when I am in two minds? What about? About you, to find
rest if possible in the thought that I am in love with you. But how to find this
rest? One of the contesting powers wants constantly to persuade the other that it
is the one most deeply and heartily in love; the next moment the other does the
same. I wouldn’t be greatly troubled if I had the struggle outside me, if there was
someone else who dared to be in love with you, or dared not to be, the crime is
equally great; but this struggle within my own being consumes me, this one
passion in its ambivalence.
Your Johannes
Just be off with you, my little fisher-girl; just hide yourself among the trees;
just take up your burden, bending down suits you well; yes, even at this moment
it is with a natural grace you bend down under the firewood you have collected –
that such a creature should bear such burdens! Like a dancer you reveal your
beautiful contours – slender waist, broad bosom, burgeoning, any enrolment
officer must admit that. Maybe you think it’s all unimportant, you think that the
fine ladies are far more beautiful. Ah, my child! You do not know how much
deception there is in the world. Just begin your journey with your burden into the
huge forest, which presumably stretches many, many miles into the country,
right up to the blue mountains. Maybe you are not a real fisher-girl but an
enchanted princess; you are the servant of a troll; he is cruel enough to make you
fetch firewood in the forest. That’s how it always is in fairy stories. Why else do
you go deeper into the forest? If you are a real fisher-girl, you should go down to
the bothy with your firewood, past me as I stand on the other side of the road. –
Just follow the footpath which winds playfully through the trees, my eyes will
find you; just turn and look at me, my eyes are following you; you cannot move
me, no longing carries me away, I sit calmly on the fence and smoke my cigar. –
Some other time – perhaps. – Yes, your glance is roguish when you half turn
your head back that way; your graceful walk inviting – yes, I know, I realize
where this path leads – to the solitude of the forest, to the murmur of the trees, to
the manifold stillness. Look, heaven itself befriends you, it hides in the clouds, it
darkens the background of the forest, it is as if it drew the curtain for us. –
Farewell, my pretty fisher-girl, live well. Thanks for your favour, it was a
beautiful moment, a mood not strong enough to move me from my firm place on
the railing, yet rich in inward emotion.
When Jacob had bargained with Laban about the payment for his services,
when they had agreed that Jacob should watch the white sheep, and as return for
his work should have the speckled lambs which were born in his flock, he laid
sticks in the water troughs and let the sheep gaze at them.
57 Similarly, I place
myself everywhere before Cordelia, her eye sees me constantly. To her it seems
nothing but attentiveness on my part: for my part, however, I know that her soul
is losing interest in everything else, that there is developing within her a spiritual
concupiscence which sees me everywhere.
My Cordelia!
If I could forget you! Is my love then a work of memory? Even if time
expunged everything from its tablets, expunged even memory itself, my relation
to you would stay just as alive, you would still not be forgotten. If I could forget
you! What then should I remember? For after all, I have forgotten myself in
order to remember you; so if I forgot you I would come to remember myself; but
the moment I remembered myself I would have to remember you again. If I
could forget you! What would happen then? There is a picture from antiquity.
58
It
depicts Ariadne. She is leaping up from her couch and gazing anxiously after a
ship that is hurrying away under full sail. By her side stands Cupid with unstrung
bow and drying his eyes. Behind her stands a winged female figure in a helmet.
It is usually assumed this is Nemesis. Imagine this picture, imagine it changed a
little. Cupid is not weeping and his bow is not unstrung; or would you have
become less beautiful, less victorious, if I had become mad? Cupid smiles and
bends his bow. Nemesis does not stand inactive by your side; she too draws her
bow. In that other picture we see a male figure on the ship, busily occupied. It is
assumed it is Theseus. Not so in my picture. He stands on the stern, he looks
back longingly, spreads his arms. He has repented, or rather, his madness has left
him, but the ship carries him away. Cupid and Nemesis both aim at him, an
arrow flies from each bow; their aim is true; one sees that, one understands, they
have both hit the same place in his heart, as a sign that his love was the Nemesis
that wrought vengeance.
Your Johannes
My Cordelia!
In love with myself, that is what people say I am. It doesn’t surprise me, for
how could they notice that I can love when I love only you; how could anyone
else suspect it when I love only you? In love with myself. Why? Because I’m in
love with you, because it is you I love, you alone, and all that truly belongs to
you, and it is thus I love myself, because this, my self, belongs to you, so that if I
ceased loving you I would cease loving myself. What then is, in the eyes of the
profane world, an expression of the greatest egoism, is for your initiated eyes the
expression of purest sympathy; what in the profane eyes of the world is an
expression of the most prosaic self-preservation, is for your sacred sight the
expression of the most enthusiastic self-annihilation.
Your Johannes
What I feared most was that the whole process might take me too long. I see,
however, that Cordelia is making great progress; yes, that it will be necessary to
mobilize everything to keep her mind on the job. She mustn’t for all the world
lose interest before time, that is, before the time when time has passed for her.
If one loves, one does not follow the main road. It is only marriage that keeps
to the middle of the king’s highway. If one loves and takes a walk from
Nøddebo, one doesn’t go along Esrom Lake even though really it’s just a hunting
track; but it is a beaten track and love prefers to beat its own. One penetrates
deeper into Crib’s Forest. And when one wanders thus, arm in arm, one
understands each other; what before vaguely delighted and pained becomes
clear. One has no idea anyone is present. – So that lovely beech tree became a
witness to your love; you first confessed it beneath its crown. You remembered
everything so clearly. That first time you saw each other, when you held out your
hands to each other in the dance, the first time you parted near dawn, when you
would admit nothing to yourselves, least of all to each other. – It’s really rather
beautiful listening to these rehearsals of love. – They fell on their knees under
the tree, they swore inviolable love to each other, they sealed the pact with the
first kiss. – These are fruitful moods that must be lavished on Cordelia. – So this
beech was a witness. Oh yes! a tree is a very suitable witness, but still not
enough. You think, perhaps, the sky was also a witness, yet the sky in itself is a
very abstract idea. But as far as that goes, there is still a witness. Ought I to stand
up, let them see I am here? No, they might know me and that would ruin things.
Should I stand up when they leave, let them realize there was someone there?
No, there’s no point in that. Let silence rest over their secret – as long as I please.
They’re in my power, I can separate them when I want. I am in on their secret; it
is only from her or from him that I could have learnt it – from her, that’s
impossible – so from him – that’s abhorrent – bravo! yet it’s really almost spite.
Well, I’ll see. If I can get a definite impression of her in the normal way, as I
prefer, but usually I can’t, then there’s nothing else for it.
My Cordelia!
I am poor – you are my riches; dark – you are my light; I own nothing, need
nothing. And how could I own anything? After all, it is a contradiction that he
can own something who does not own himself. I am happy as a child who is
neither able to own anything nor allowed to. I own nothing, for I belong only to
you; I am not, I have ceased to be, in order to be yours.
Your Johannes
My Cordelia!
‘Mine’: what does this word mean? Not what belongs to me, but what I belong
to, what contains my whole being, which is mine only so far as I belong to it. My
God is not the God that belongs to me, but the God to whom I belong; and so,
too, when I say my native land, my home, my calling, my longing, my hope. If
there had been no immortality before, this thought that I am yours would be a
breach of the normal course of nature.
Your Johannes
My Cordelia!
What am I? The modest narrator who accompanies your triumphs; the dancer
who supports you when you rise in your lovely grace; the branch upon which
you rest a moment when you are tired of flying; the bass that interposes itself
below the soprano’s fervour to let it climb even higher – what am I? I am the
earthly gravity that keeps you on the ground. What am I, then? Body, mass,
earth, dust and ashes. – You, my Cordelia, you are soul and spirit.
Your Johannes
My Cordelia!
Love is everything. So, for one who loves, everything has ceased to have
meaning in itself and only means something through the interpretation love gives
it. Thus if another betrothed became convinced there was some other girl he
cared for, he would presumably stand there like a criminal and his fiancée be
outraged. You, however, I know would see a tribute in such a confession; for me
to be able to love another you know is an impossibility; it is my love for you
casting its reflection over the whole of life. So when I care about someone else,
it is not to convince myself that I do not love her but only you – that would be
presumptuous; but since my whole soul is filled with you, life takes on another
meaning for me: it becomes a myth about you.
Your Johannes
My Cordelia!
My love consumes me. Only my voice is left,
59 a voice which has fallen in love
with you whispers to you everywhere that I love you. Oh! does it weary you to
hear this voice? Everywhere it enfolds you; like an inexhaustible, shifting
surround, I place my transparently reflected soul about your pure, deep being.
Your Johannes
My Cordelia!
One reads in ancient tales how a river fell in love with a girl. Similarly, my
soul is a river which loves you. At one moment it is peaceful and allows your
image to be reflected in it deeply and undistorted; at another it fancies it has
captured your image, and its waves foam to prevent you getting away;
sometimes it softly ruffles its surface and plays with your reflection, sometimes
it loses it, and then its waves become dark and despairing. – That’s how my soul
is: like a river that has fallen in love with you.
Your Johannes
Frankly, without an exceptionally vivid imagination one could conceive of a
more convenient, comfortable, and above all more elegant means of transport;
riding with a peat-carrier creates a stir only in a metaphorical sense. – But at a
pinch one accepts it with thanks. One goes some way down the highway, one
sets oneself up on the cart, one rides five miles or so and meets nothing, ten
miles and everything’s going fine: one becomes calm and secure; really the
scenery looks better than usual from this position. One has come almost fifteen
miles – now who would have expected, so far out here on the highway, to meet
someone from Copenhagen? And it is someone from Copenhagen, you can see
that all right, it’s no countryman; he looks at you in a quite special way, so
assured, so observant, so appraising, and a little scornful. Yes, my dear girl, your
position is by no means comfortable; you look as if you were sitting on a
serving-tray, the wagon is so flat that it has no hollow for your feet. But it’s your
own fault; my carriage is entirely at your service. I venture to offer you a much
less embarrassing place, unless it would embarrass you to sit by my side. If so, I
would leave the whole carriage to you and sit in the driver’s seat myself, pleased
to be allowed to convey you to your destination. – The straw hat isn’t quite
adequate protection against a sideways glance. It’s no good your bending down
your head, I can still admire the lovely profile. – Isn’t it annoying, the peasant
greeting me? But after all it’s quite proper for a peasant to show respect to a
distinguished man. – You can’t get out of it like that; here’s a tavern, yes, a
staging-post, and a peat-carrier is in his own way too pious not to attend to his
devotions. I’ll take care of him. I have an exceptional talent for charming peatcarriers. May I be so fortunate as to please you too! He won’t be able to resist
my offer, and when he has accepted it he won’t be able to resist its effect. If I
can’t do it, my servant can. There, he’s going into the tap-room now; you are
alone on the wagon in the shelter. – Heaven only knows what kind of young girl
this is. Could she be a little middle-class girl, perhaps a deacon’s daughter? If so,
for a deacon’s daughter she is uncommonly pretty, and dressed with unusual
taste. The deacon must have a good living. It occurs to me, might she not be a
little thoroughbred who has tired of riding in her equipage, who has perhaps
gone for a little hike out to the country house, and now wants to try her hand at a
little adventure too? Certainly possible, such things are not unheard of. – The
peasant doesn’t know a thing; he is a numbskull who knows only how to drink:
yes, yes, just drink, old chap, he’s welcome to it. – But what do I see in there?
Miss Jespersen, no less, Hansine Jespersen, daughter of the wholesaler. God
preserve us! We two know each other. It was her I once met on Bredgade, she
was sitting on a seat facing backwards and she couldn’t get the window up; I put
on my glasses and then had the pleasure of following her with my eyes. It was a
very confined position, there were so many in the carriage that she couldn’t
move, and she presumably didn’t dare to cause a scene. The present position is
just as awkward, to be sure. Clearly we two are predestined for each other. She’s
supposed to be a romantic little girl; she is definitely out on her own. – There
comes my servant with the peat-carrier. He is completely drunk. It’s disgusting;
they’re a depraved lot, these peat-carriers. Yes, alas! Yet there are worse people
than peat-carriers. See, now you are going to have to drive anyway. You will
have to drive the horses yourself; it is quite romantic. You refuse my invitation.
You insist you are a very good driver. You do not deceive me. I can see well
enough how sly you are. When you have gone a little way, you will jump off, it’s
easy to find a hiding-place in the forest. – My horse must be saddled, I shall
follow you on horseback. – There, look! now I am ready, now you can feel safe
against any assault. – But don’t be so frightfully afraid, or I’ll turn back
immediately. I only want to frighten you a little and provide an opportunity for
your natural beauty to be heightened. You don’t know, indeed, that it was I who
let the peasant get drunk, and I have not permitted myself a single offensive
remark. Everything can still be fine; I shall no doubt give the affair a twist which
will let you laugh at the whole story. All I want is a little settling of accounts
with you. Never believe I would take any young girl off her guard. I am a friend
of freedom, and whatever does not come to me freely I do not bother with at all.
– ‘You will certainly realize that you cannot continue your journey in this
manner. I myself am going hunting, that’s why I’m on horseback. However, my
carriage is ready at the tavern. If you so command, it will catch up with you in
an instant and take you where you want. I am myself unfortunately unable to
have the pleasure of accompanying you, for I am bound by a hunting promise,
and they are sacred.’ – But you accept – everything will be arranged in an
instant. – Now you see you needn’t at all be embarrassed at seeing me again, or
at least not more embarrassed than well suits you. You can amuse yourself with
the whole story, laugh a little and think a little about me. More I do not ask. It
may not seem very much; for me it is enough. It is the beginning, and I am
especially strong on rudiments.
Yesterday evening the aunt had a small party. I knew Cordelia would take out
her knitting. I had hidden a little note in it. She lost it, picked it up, became
excited and wistful. This is how one should always exploit the situation. It is
incredible the advantages you can derive from it. A note of no consequence in
itself, read in these circumstances, becomes for her infinitely important. She got
no chance to talk with me; I had arranged it so that I had to escort a lady home.
So Cordelia had to wait until today. That’s always a good way of letting an
impression bury itself all the deeper in her soul. It looks all the time as if it were
I that was showing her attention. The advantage I have is that I am given a place
in her thoughts everywhere, surprise her everywhere.
Love, however, has its own dialectic. There was a young girl I was once in
love with. Last summer at the theatre in Dresden I saw an actress who bore a
deceptive resemblance to her. Because of this I wanted to make her
acquaintance, and succeeded, and then convinced myself that there was a quite
considerable difference all the same. Today I met a lady on the street who
reminded me of that actress. This story can go on as long as you like.
Everywhere my thoughts encircle Cordelia, I place them around her like
guardian angels. As Venus is drawn in her chariot by doves, she sits in her
triumphal car and I harness my thoughts to it like winged creatures. She herself
sits there happy, rich as a child, omnipotent as a goddess; I walk by her side.
Truly, a young girl is after all, and remains, a venerabile of Nature and of all
existence! That’s something no one knows better than I. The only pity is that this
glory is so short-lived. She smiles at me, she greets me, she beckons to me as if
she were my sister. A single glance reminds her that she is my beloved.
Love has many positionings. Cordelia makes good progress. She is sitting on
my lap, her arm twines, soft and warm, round my neck; she leans upon my
breast, light, without gravity; the soft contours scarcely touch me; like a flower
her lovely figure twines about me, freely as a ribbon. Her eyes are hidden
beneath her lashes, her bosom is dazzling white like snow, so smooth that my
eye cannot rest, it would glance off if her bosom were not moving. What does
this movement mean? Is it love? Perhaps. It is a presentiment of it, its dream. It
still lacks energy. Her embrace is comprehensive, as the cloud enfolding the
transfigured one, detached as a breeze, soft as the fondling of a flower; she
kisses me unspecifically, as the sky kisses the sea, gently and quietly, as the dew
kisses a flower, solemnly as the sea kisses the image of the moon.
I would call her passion at this moment a naive passion. When the change has
been made and I begin to draw back in earnest, she will call on everything she
has to captivate me. She has no other means for this purpose than the erotic
itself, except that this will now appear on a quite different scale. It then becomes
a weapon in her hand which she wields against me. I then have the reflected
passion. She fights for her own sake because she knows I possess the erotic; she
fights for her own sake so as to overcome me. She herself is in need of a higher
form of the erotic. What I taught her to suspect by arousing her, my coldness
now teaches her to understand but in such a way that she thinks it is she herself
who discovers it. So she wants to take me by surprise; she wants to believe that
she has outstripped me in audacity, and that makes me her prisoner. Her passion
then becomes specific, energetic, conclusive, dialectical; her kiss total, her
embrace without hesitation. – In me she seeks her freedom and finds it the better
the more firmly I encompass her. The engagement bursts. When that has
happened she needs a little rest, so that nothing unseemly will emerge from this
wild tumult. Her passion then composes itself once more and she is mine.
Just as I had already supervised her reading indirectly in the time of Edvard of
blessed memory, so now I do that directly. What I offer her is what I consider the
best nourishment: mythology and fairy-tales. She is nevertheless free in this as in
everything; there is nothing that I have not learned from her herself. If it isn’t
there to begin with, I first put it there.
When the servant girls go to the Zoological Gardens in the summer, generally
the Gardens offer but poor entertainment. The girls go there only once a year and
so feel they must really make the most of it. They have to put on hat and shawl
and disfigure themselves in every way. Their gaiety is wild, unseemly and
lascivious. No, I count then on Frederiksberg Gardens. It’s on Sunday afternoons
they come there, and I too. Here everything is seemly and decent, the gaiety
itself quieter and more refined. In general, the man who doesn’t appreciate
servant girls has more to lose than they. The servant girls’ motley host is really
the most beautiful civil guard we have in Denmark. If I were king, I know what I
would do – I wouldn’t review the regulars. If I were a city alderman I should
immediately move to have a welfare committee appointed to strive to encourage
the servant girls in every possible way, by insight, advice, exhortation and
suitable rewards, to get themselves up with taste and care. Why should beauty go
to waste? Why should it go through life unnoticed? At least let it appear once a
week in the light that shows it to best advantage! But above all, taste, restraint. A
servant girl should not look like a lady, so far I agree with Politivennen,
60 but the
reasons that respectable paper adduces are altogether mistaken. If we could
anticipate a desirable flourishing of the servant class in this way, wouldn’t this in
turn have a beneficial effect on our houses’ daughters? Or is it too bold of me to
espy a future for Denmark which can truly be called matchless? If only I myself
were lucky enough to be that golden age’s contemporary,
61
the whole day could
be spent with a good conscience in the streets and alleys rejoicing in the
pleasures of the eye. What broad and bold, what patriotic daydreams! But here I
am in Frederiksberg Gardens where the servant girls come on Sunday afternoon,
and I too. – First come the country girls, hand in hand with their sweethearts; or
in another formation, girls all in front hand in hand, men all behind; or in
another, two girls and one man. This throng forms the frame; they usually stand
or sit along by the trees in the big quadrangle in front of the pavilion. They are
hale and hearty, just the colour clashes are a little too strong, in their dress as
well as their complexions. Inside this frame now come the servant girls from
Jutland and Fyn: tall, straight, a little too stalwart, their dress a little confused.
Here there would be much for the committee to do. Nor does one want for the
occasional representative of the Bornholm division: capable cooks, but not very
approachable either in the kitchen or in Frederiksberg; there is something
proudly forbidding about them. The contrast their presence offers is therefore not
without its effect, and I’d rather not be without them out here, though I rarely
have anything to do with them. – Now follow the core troops, the girls from
Nyboder. Smaller in stature, plump, with a full figure, delicate complexion, gay,
happy, sprightly, talkative, a little coquettish and above all, bareheaded. Their
dress can well approximate to a lady’s; just two things to notice, they don’t have
a shawl but a kerchief, no hat but a little smart cap at most, they should
preferably be bareheaded. – Why, hello, Marie! Fancy meeting you here! It’s
been a long time. Are you still at the Counsellor’s? – ‘Yes’ – An excellent
situation, isn’t it? – ‘Yes’ – But you are so alone out here, no one to accompany
… no sweetheart, perhaps he hasn’t had time today, or you’re waiting for him? –
What, you aren’t engaged? Impossible. The prettiest girl in Copenhagen, a girl in
service at the Counsellor’s, a girl who is an embellishment and an example to all
servant girls, a girl who knows how to dress so prettily and … so opulently.
What an exquisite little handkerchief you have in your hand, of the finest
cambric … and what do I see, embroidery on the edges? I bet it cost ten marks
… you can be sure there’s many a fine lady who doesn’t own its equal … French
gloves … a silk parasol … and a girl like that not engaged? … It’s absurd.
Unless my memory is letting me down badly, Jens was pretty fond of you. You
must know Jens, the wholesaler’s Jens, on the second floor … See, I got it right
… So why didn’t you get engaged? Jens was a handsome fellow, he had a good
situation, with the Counsellor’s influence he might have made a policeman or
fireman in due course; it wouldn’t have been such a bad match … The fault must
definitely be yours, you’ve been too hard on him … ‘No!, but I found out Jens
had been engaged once before to a girl they say he didn’t treat nicely at all.’ – …
No, you don’t say; who would have believed Jens was such a naughty rascal…
yes, these Guards fellows … these Guards fellows aren’t to be depended on …
You did quite right, a girl like you is altogether too good to be thrown away on
just anybody … You can be sure you’ll make a better match, I’ll guarantee it. –
How is Miss Juliane? I haven’t seen her for some time. I’m sure my pretty Marie
could help me with a little information … just because one has been unhappy in
love oneself one needn’t lack sympathy for others … There are so many people
here … I daren’t talk to you about it, I’m afraid in case someone spies on me …
Listen just a moment, my pretty Marie … Look, here’s the place, in this shaded
walk, where the trees twine round each other so as to hide us from others, where
we see no one else, hear no human voice but only a soft echo of the music …
here I dare to speak of my secret … Now, if Jens hadn’t been a bad man, you’d
have walked with him here arm in arm, wouldn’t you, and listened to the joyful
music, and enjoyed an even greater happiness yourself… why so moved? – Just
forget Jens … Don’t get me wrong … it was to meet you I came out here … It
was to see you that I came to the Counsellor’s … You surely noticed …
Whenever I could I always passed the kitchen door … You must be mine … The
banns shall be published … tomorrow evening I will explain everything … up
the back-stairs, the door to the left, right across from the kitchen … Goodbye,
my pretty Marie … don’t let anyone know you have seen me out here or spoken
with me. You know my secret. – She is really delightful, something might be
made of her. – If I ever get a foothold in her chamber I’ll announce those banns
myself. I have always tried to develop that beautiful Greek autarchy and in
particular make the priest superfluous.
If I could stand behind Cordelia when she received a letter from me, it might
be very interesting. Then I could convince myself more easily how far she had
taken them in erotically in the most literal sense. On the whole, letters are and
will always be an invaluable means for making an impression upon a young girl;
often the dead symbol has far greater influence than the living word. A letter is a
secret communication; you are master of the situation, feel no pressure from
anyone’s presence, and I think a young girl would really rather be quite alone
with her ideal, that is, at particular moments, and precisely when it is influencing
her mind most strongly. Even if her ideal has found a fairly complete expression
in a definite object of love, there are still moments when she feels that there is an
excess in the ideal that reality lacks. These great feasts of the atonement must be
granted to her; only one must be careful to use them in the right way, so that she
does not return to reality from them weakened but strengthened. Here a letter
helps; its effect is that one is invisibly but spiritually present at these sacred
moments of consecration, while the idea that the real person is the author o the
letter creates a natural and easy transition to reality.
Could I become jealous of Cordelia? Damn it, yes! Though in another sense,
no! For if I saw that even if I won my fight against the other, her nature would be
disturbed and not what I wanted – then I would give her up.
An old philosopher has said that if you accurately record all that you
experience, before you know it you are a philosopher. For some time now I have
lived in association with the community of the betrothed. Such a relationship
ought then to bear at least some fruit. So I have considered gathering material for
a book, entitled Contribution to the Theory of the Kiss, dedicated to all tender
lovers. It is remarkable, besides, that no work on this subject exists. So if I
manage to complete it I will also be fulfilling a long-felt need. Could the reason
for this gap in the literature be that philosophers do not consider such matters, or
is it that they do not understand them? – I can offer several suggestions right
away. The perfect kiss requires that the agents involved be a man and a girl. A
kiss between men is in poor taste, or what is worse, distasteful. – Secondly, I
believe a kiss comes closer to its concept when a man kisses a girl than when a
girl kisses a man.
62 Where in the course of years the distinction in this relation is
lost sight of, the kiss loses its significance. This is true of the domestic kiss with
which married people, for want of napkins, wipe each other on the mouth while
saying, ‘You’re welcome.’ – If the age difference is very large, the kiss falls
outside the concept. I remember in a girls’ school, in one of the provinces, the
oldest class had its own saying: ‘to kiss the counsellor’, an expression with
which they associated an idea that was anything but agreeable. It began like this:
the schoolmistress had a brother-in-law living in her house. He had been a
counsellor, was an elderly man, and took advantage of his age to kiss the young
girls. – The kiss must be an expression of a definite passion. When a brother and
sister who are twins kiss each other, that is not a proper kiss. The same is true of
kisses that are bonuses from Christmas games, likewise a stolen kiss. A kiss is a
symbolic action which lacks meaning when the feeling it should indicate is not
present, and this feeling can only be present under certain conditions. – If one
wants to try classifying the kiss, one can conceive of several principles of
classification. They can be classified according to sound. Unfortunately, here
language is not adequate to my observations. I don’t believe all the languages in
the world have an adequate supply of onomatopoeias to cover the distinctions I
have come to recognize just in my uncle’s house. Sometimes it is clicking,
sometimes hissing, sometimes smacking, sometimes popping, sometimes
rumbling, sometimes resonant, sometimes hollow, sometimes like calico, and so
on. One can classify the kiss according to the form of contact, as in the
tangential kiss, or kiss en passant, and the clinging kiss. One can classify them
with reference to time, the brief and the prolonged. There is also, with reference
to time, another classification, and it is the only one I have really cared about.
Thus a distinction is made between the first kiss and all others. What reflection
focuses on here is incommensurable with what the other classifications bring to
light; it is indifferent to sound, touch, time in general. But the first kiss is
qualitatively different from all others. Few people consider this; a pity if there
were not one who thinks about it.
My Cordelia!
A good answer is like a sweet kiss, says Solomon.
63 You know I am given to
asking questions. People almost take me to task for it. That’s because they do not
understand what I ask; for you and you alone understand what it is I ask, and you
and you alone understand how to answer, and you and you alone understand how
to give a good answer; for a good answer is like a sweet kiss, says Solomon.
Your Johannes
There is a difference between a spiritual and a physical eroticism. Up to now it
is mostly the spiritual kind I have tried to develop in Cordelia. My physical
presence must now be something different, not just the accompanying mood, it
must be tempting. I have been constantly preparing myself these days by reading
the celebrated passage in the Phaedrus on love.
64
It electrifies my whole being
and is an excellent prelude. After all, Plato really understood love.
My Cordelia!
Latin says of an attentive disciple that he hangs on his master’s lips.
65 For love
everything is imagery, and the image in turn is reality. Am I not a diligent, an
attentive disciple? But then you aren’t saying a word!
Your Johannes
If someone other than I were guiding this process, he would presumably have
more sense than to let himself be guided. Were I to consult an initiate among the
betrothed, he would probably declare with an access of erotic daring, ‘I search in
vain in these positionings of love for the sound-image in which the lovers tell of
their love.’
66
I would reply, ‘I’m glad you seek it in vain, for that image just does
not come within the scope of the genuinely erotic, not even if you include the
interesting.’ Love is far too substantial to make do with chat; erotic situations
have far too much meaning in themselves to be supplemented by chat. They are
silent, still, in definite contours, and yet eloquent as the music of Memnon’s
statue.
67 Eros gesticulates, he does not speak; or if he does, it is an enigmatic
hint, a symbolic music. Erotic situations are always either sculptural or
picturesque; but two people talking together about their love are neither
sculptural nor picturesque. The solidly engaged, however, always begin with
such small talk, which later also becomes the connecting thread in their
garrulous marriage. This small talk is also the beginning and promise of the fact
that their marriage will not lack the dowry Ovid speaks of: dos est uxoria lites.
68
– If there is talking to be done, it is enough that one of them should do it. The
man should do the talking and should therefore possess some of the powers that
lay in the girdle of Venus, with which she beguiled men: conversation and sweet
flattery, that is to say, the insinuative.
69
It by no means follows that Eros is silent,
or that it would be erotically incorrect to converse, only that the conversation
itself should be erotic, not lost in edifying observations about prospects in life,
and so on, and that it be essentially regarded as a respite from the erotic act, a
pastime, not as what is most important. Such a conversation, such a
confabulatio, is in its nature quite divine, and I never weary of talking with a
young girl. That is to say, I can get tired of a particular young girl, but never of
talking with a young girl. For me, that is just as impossible as getting tired of
breathing. What is the real peculiarity of such a conversation is its vegetative
flowering. The conversation stays down to earth, it has no essential topic, the
accidental is the law of its movement – but ‘a thousand joys’ is the name of itself
and its produce.
70
My Cordelia!
‘My’, ‘Your’ – these words enclose the humble content of my letters like a
parenthesis. Have you noticed that the distance between its arms is getting
shorter? Oh, my Cordelia! It is beautiful that the emptier the parenthesis
becomes, the fuller it is with meaning.
Your Johannes
My Cordelia!
Is an embrace to be at loggerheads?
Your Johannes
Generally Cordelia keeps silent. This has always pleased me. Her womanly
nature is too deep to plague one with hiatus, a figure of speech especially
characteristic of the woman and which is unavoidable if the man who is to
provide the missing consonants before or after is equally feminine. Occasionally
a single brief utterance, however, betrays how much there is in her, and then I
can lend a hand. It’s as though, behind a person making disconnected stabs at a
drawing with an unsure hand, there stood someone else who kept on making out
of it something bold and rounded off. She is surprised herself, and yet it seems to
be her own. I watch over her, therefore, over every accidental remark, every
casually dropped word, and when I give it back to her it has always something
more significant in it that she both knows and does not know.
Today we were at a party. We hadn’t exchanged a word. We were leaving the
table when a servant came in and informed Cordelia that a messenger wished to
speak to her. The messenger was from me and brought a letter which contained
allusions to a remark I had made at the table. I had managed to introduce it into
the general table conversation so that Cordelia, although she sat at a distance
from me, couldn’t avoid overhearing and misunderstanding it. This is where the
letter came in. If I hadn’t succeeded in steering the conversation in that direction,
I’d have been there in person at the appointed time to confiscate the letter. She
came back into the room; she had to tell a little lie. Things like that consolidate
the erotic secretiveness without which she cannot make headway down the road
onto which she has been directed.
My Cordelia!
Do you believe that he who lays his head on a fairy mound sees the image of
the fairy in his dreams? I don’t know, but I do know this, that when I rest my
head on your breast and don’t close my eyes but look out beyond, I see the
countenance of an angel. Do you believe that the person who reclines his head
on a fairy mound cannot lie still? I don’t believe so, but I know that when my
head bends to your bosom I am roused too strongly for sleep to fall on my eyes.
Your Johannes
Jacta est alea.
71 The turn must now be made. I was with her today, quite taken
with the thought of an idea that entirely occupied me. I had neither eye nor ear
for her. The idea itself was interesting and fascinated her too. It would also have
been incorrect to begin this new operation by being cold in her presence. Now
that I have left and the thought no longer occupies her, she will realize at once
that I was different from usual. That it is in her solitude she realizes the change
makes this discovery much more painful to her, it acts more slowly but all the
more forcibly. She cannot immediately flare up, and when the opportunity arises
she has already pondered the thing so much that she cannot find expression for it
all in one go but always retains a residue of doubt. The unrest increases, the
letters cease, the erotic fare is reduced, the love is scorned as ridiculous. Perhaps
she goes along with it for a moment, but in the long run she cannot endure it.
She wants now to captivate me with the same means I have used against her,
with the erotic.
When it comes to breaking off an engagement every little girl is a great casuist,
and although the schools hold no courses on the subject, all young girls are
excellently informed of the circumstances in which an engagement should be
broken off. It should really be a standard question in the final-year school exams,
and while I know there is usually very little variety in essay subjects in girls’
schools, I am certain there would be no lack of variation here, since the problem
itself offers wide scope for a girl’s powers of penetration. And why shouldn’t a
young girl be given an opportunity to prove her sharpness in the most brilliant
manner? Or don’t you believe she will get a chance here to show that she is
mature enough to – be engaged? I once experienced a situation that interested
me very much. At a family’s where I sometimes visited, the older members were
out one day, but the two young daughters of the house had invited a circle of
their girl friends for a morning coffee-party. They were eight in all, all between
sixteen and twenty. Presumably they hadn’t expected any visitors; the maid had
probably been given orders to say no one was at home. I went in all the same and
saw clearly they were a little surprised. God knows what eight young girls like
that really talk about in a solemn synod of this kind. Married women, too,
sometimes gather in similar meetings. Then they discuss pastoral theology,
taking up in particular the important questions of when it is most proper to let
the maid go to the market alone, whether it is better to have an account with the
butcher or pay cash, whether it’s likely the cook has a sweetheart and how to put
an end to this sweetheart skylarking which causes delays with the cooking. – I
found my place in this beautiful cluster. It was very early spring. The sun sent a
few scattered rays to herald its arrival. In the room itself everything was wintry,
and the scattered rays so annunciative for that very reason. From the table came
the aroma of coffee – and then there were the girls themselves, happy, healthy,
blooming, and exuberant too, for their anxiety had soon been allayed, and in any
case what was there to fear? They were in a way manpower enough. – I managed
to draw their attention and the talk to the question of when an engagement
should be broken off. While my eye diverted itself by flitting from one flower to
the other in this garland of girls, entertaining itself by resting now on one beauty,
now on another, my outer ear revelled in the pleasant music of the voices, and
the inner ear in listening observantly to what was said. A single word was often
enough for me to form a deep insight into the heart of a particular girl, and its
history. How seductive, after all, is the road of love! How interesting to find out
how far down it the individual has come! I continually fanned the conversation;
cleverness, wit, aesthetic objectivity all helped to make the relationship between
us more free, yet everything remained within the bounds of strictest decorum. As
we thus joked in the free-and-easy atmosphere of conversation, there lay
dormant the possibility of a single word of mine causing the good children an
unfortunate embarrassment. This possibility was in my power. The girls did not
realize it, hardly suspected it. It was suppressed all along by the easy play of
conversation, as Scheherazade put off the death sentence by telling stories.
72
Sometimes I led the conversation to the very edge of sadness; sometimes I gave
free rein to wantonness; sometimes I tempted them out into a dialectical game.
And what material offers more diversity, all depending on how one looks at it? I
kept on introducing new themes. – I told of a girl who had been cruelly forced to
break off her engagement by her parents. That unhappy collision almost brought
tears to their eyes. – I told of someone who had broken off an engagement and
given two reasons, that the girl was too large and that he had not gone down on
his knees to her when confessing his love. When I had objected to him that these
couldn’t possibly be considered good enough reasons, he replied, ‘Indeed, they
are precisely good enough for me to get what I want, for no one can offer a
rational answer to that.’ I presented a very difficult case for the assembly’s
consideration. A young girl broke off her engagement because she felt she and
her sweetheart were unsuited to each other. The loved one tried to bring her to
reason by assuring her how much he loved her, to which she replied: ‘Either we
are suited to each other and there is real sympathy, and then you will see that we
do not suit each other; or we do not suit each other, and then you will see we do
not suit each other.’ It was amusing to see how the young girls cudgelled their
brains to understand this puzzling story, and yet I could see clearly that one or
two of them understood it very well, for when it comes to whether to break off
an engagement, every young girl is a born casuist. – Yes, I really think I’d find it
easier to dispute with the devil himself than with a young girl when it’s a
question of when one should break off an engagement.
Today I was with her. Quickly, with the speed of thought, I led the
conversation to the same subject I had occupied her with yesterday, in a renewed
effort to arouse her to an ecstasy. ‘There was something I should have mentioned
yesterday; it occurred to me after I’d gone.’ That succeeded. As long as I am
with her she enjoys listening to me; when I’ve gone she realizes she’s been
cheated and that I am changed. In this way one extends one’s credit. The method
is sly but very expedient, like all indirect methods. She has no difficulty in
explaining to herself that I myself can be occupied with the sort of things I talk
about, and indeed at the time they even interest her, yet I cheat her out of the real
erotic.
Oderint, dum metuant.
73 As if only fear and hatred belonged together, while
fear and love had nothing at all to do with each other, as if it wasn’t fear that
made love interesting! What kind of love is it with which we embrace Nature?
Isn’t there a secret fear and terror in it because Nature’s beautiful harmony has to
work its way out of lawlessness and wild confusion, its security out of
faithlessness? But this anxiety is just what is most fascinating. So too with love
if it is to claim our interest. Behind it there should brood the deep, fearful night
from which the flower of love springs forth. So rests nymphaea alba,
74 with its
cup, on the surface of the water, while thought fears to plunge down into the
deep darkness where it has its root. – I have noticed, she always calls me mine
when she writes to me but lacks the courage to say it to me. Today I begged her
to do that, as insinuatingly and with as much erotic warmth as I could. She began
doing so; an ironic glance, more brief and quicker than you can say it, was
enough to make it impossible for her, although my lips urged her with all their
might. This mood is normal.
She’s mine. I do not confide this to the stars, as is custom and practice. I do not
really see what interest those distant spheres can have in this information. Nor do
I confide it to any human being, not even to Cordelia. I keep this secret all to
myself, whisper it, as it were, to myself, in my most secret conversations with
myself. The attempted resistance on her part was not particularly strong; on the
other hand the erotic strength she is developing is admirable. How interesting
she is in this deep passionateness, how great, almost supernatural! How flexible
she is in evasion, how supple in insinuating herself wherever she finds an
unfortified point! Everything is mobilized, but in this elemental whirl I find
myself precisely in my own element. Yet even in this commotion she is by no
means unbeautiful, not torn apart in her moods, not split up into her parts. She is
a constant Anadyomene,
75 except that she does not rise up in naive grace or
unaffected calm, but stirred by the strong heart-throbs of love, though still in
unity and equilibrium. Erotically, she is fully equipped for the struggle; she
fights with the shafts of her eyes, with the command of her brow, with the
secretiveness of her forehead, with the eloquence of her bosom, with the
dangerous attractions of the embrace, with the lips’ prayer, with her cheeks’
smile, with the sweet longing of her whole form. There is a power in her, an
energy, as if she were a Valkyrie; but this erotic vigour is in turn tempered by a
certain seductive languor which is exhaled over her. – She must not be held too
long at this peak, where only anxiety and unrest can hold her steady and prevent
her from falling over. With respect to such emotions she will soon feel that the
engagement is too narrow, too confining. She herself will become the tempter
who seduces me into going beyond the boundary of the normal; in this way she
will become conscious of it herself, and for me that’s the main thing.
Not a few remarks are being let fall on her part that suggest she is tired of the
engagement. They do not go unheeded; they are my operation’s scouts in her
soul, which give me informative hints; they’re the ends of threads with which I
wind her into my plan.
My Cordelia!
You complain about the engagement. You think our love does not need an
external bond that only gets in the way. In this I recognize my excellent Cordelia
immediately! Truly, I admire you. Our external union is after all nothing but a
separation. There is still a partition wall separating us, like Pyramus and
Thisbe.
76 That people are privy to it is still a disturbing factor. Only in opposition
is there freedom. Only when no outsider suspects it does the love acquire
meaning. Only when every stranger believes the lovers hate each other is love
happy.
Your Johannes
Soon the bond of betrothal will be broken. She is the one who is unloosening
it, to see if by this loosening she can’t captivate me still more, as flowing locks
are more captivating than those that are bound up. Were I to annul the
engagement myself, I would miss this erotic somersault which is so seductive to
look at and so sure a sign of her soul’s daring. For me that’s the main thing.
Furthermore, the whole incident would cause me some unpleasantness with
others. I would be mistrusted, hated, detested – though unfairly, for think of the
advantages it would bring many. Many a little maiden would be quite happy, in
the absence of a betrothal, to have come almost that far. That’s always
something, though, frankly, painfully little because once you have elbowed your
way to a place on the expectancy list you have no expectations; the higher one
rises on the list, and the further forward one gets, the less prospect there is. In the
world of love, the principle of seniority for advancement and promotion does not
apply. Furthermore, a little maiden like that is tired of retaining undivided
possession; she needs to have her life stirred by an event. But what can compare
with an unhappy love affair, especially, too, when she can take the whole thing
so lightly? So she lets herself and her neighbour believe she is among the
deceived, and since she doesn’t qualify for enrolment in a Magdalena
Institution,
77 she takes up lodging beside it in a tearful story. One is thus in duty
bound to hate me. Furthermore, there is still another division, of those who have
been wholly, or half, or three-quarters, deceived by another. Here there are many
degrees, all the way from those who have a ring to show for it to those who can
pin their faith on a handshake in a country dance. Their wounds are reopened by
the new pain. Their hatred I accept as a bonus. But naturally, to my poor heart all
these haters are like so many secret lovers. A king without a country is an absurd
figure, but a war of succession between a host of pretenders to a kingdom
without a country – that outdoes everything in absurdity. I ought to be loved and
cared for by the fair sex as a public pawnbroker. After all, a real fiancé can only
take care of one, but such a comprehensive possibility can provide – that is to
say, provide more or less – for as many as may be. Then I’m free of all this finite
twaddle and also have the advantage of, afterwards, being able to appear in an
entirely new role. The young girls will be sorry for me, sympathize with me,
sigh for me; I chime in in just the same key; this is also a way of taking captive.
It’s rather strange; I notice at this juncture with dismay that I am getting the
symptom that Horace wished on every faithless girl – a black tooth, a front tooth
at that.
78 How superstitious we can be! The tooth really disturbs me, I find it
quite hard to stand any allusion to it; it’s a weak side I have. While otherwise I
am fully armed, here even the biggest bungler can administer me a blow that
goes far deeper than he thinks when he touches on the tooth. I do everything to
make it white, but in vain. I say with Palnatoke:
I rub it day and night,
But I do not erase this dark shadow.
79
Life contains, after all, extraordinarily much puzzlement. A little thing like that
can upset me more than the most dangerous assault, the most embarrassing
situation. I want it extracted, yet that would interfere with my speaking voice
and its power. But I want it out anyway, I want a false one put in; false to the
world, that is; it was the black one that was false to me.
It’s quite excellent that Cordelia finds an engagement an impediment. Marriage
is and remains, after all, an honourable institution, even though it has the boring
feature that from its very youth it receives part of the veneration brought by age.
But an engagement, on the other hand, is a genuinely human invention, and so
important and ridiculous on that account that it is quite all right for a young girl
in the whirl of passion to place herself above it on the one hand, yet on the other
to feel its importance, to feel her soul’s energy, like a higher circulatory system,
present everywhere within her. What is needed now is to steer her in such a way
that in her bold flight she loses sight of marriage and of the mainland of reality
in general, so that her soul, as much in its pride as in its anxiety about losing me,
destroys an imperfect human form in order to hasten on to something higher than
the ordinarily human. In this respect, however, I need have no fear, for her
passage through life is already so floating and light that reality has already to a
large extent been lost sight of. Besides, I am constantly on board and can always
unfurl the sails.
Woman is and remains, after all, an inexhaustible topic for my reflections, an
eternal profusion for my observations. Let the person who feels no urge for this
study be whatever he likes in the world; one thing he is not: he is not an
aesthetician. The glory and divinity of aesthetics is just this, that it only enters
into relation with the beautiful, all it has to do with, essentially, is fiction and the
fair sex. It can gladden me and my heart to imagine the sun of feminine
loveliness radiating in an infinite diversity, spreading itself in a confusion of
tongues where each individual has a small part of femininity’s total wealth, yet
so that what else she has forms itself harmoniously about that point. In this sense
feminine beauty is infinitely divisible. Except that the particular share of beauty
must be harmoniously controlled, for otherwise its effect will be disturbing and it
will seem as though Nature’s intentions for this woman had not been realized.
My eyes can never weary of coursing over this multifaceted surface, these
diffused emanations of womanly beauty. Every individual feature has its own
small part and is yet complete, happy, glad, beautiful. Each has its own: the
merry smile, the roguish glance, the longing eye, the pensive head, the exuberant
spirits, the quiet sadness, the deep foreboding, the portending melancholy, the
earthly homesickness, the unconfessed emotions, the beckoning brows, the
questioning lips, the secretive forehead, the inveigling curls, the concealing
lashes, the heavenly pride, the earthly modesty, the angelic purity, the secret
blush, the graceful step, the lovely swaying, the languishing posture, the wistful
dreaming, the unaccountable sighs, the willowy form, the soft outlines, the
luxuriant bosom, the swelling hips, the tiny foot, the dainty hand. – Each has its
own, what it has the other does not. When I have looked and looked again at,
considered and considered again, this worldly multiplicity, when I have smiled,
sighed, flattered, threatened, desired, tempted, laughed, wept, hoped, feared,
won, lost – I close the fan and the scattered fragments gather themselves into the
unity, the parts into the whole. My soul then rejoices, my heart pounds, my
passion is inflamed. This one girl, the only one in all the world, she must belong
to me, she must be mine. God can keep His heaven so long as I can keep her. I
know what I’m choosing – something so great that it can’t be to heaven’s
advantage to apportion things thus, for, if I kept her, what would be left over for
heaven? The Muham-madan faithful would be disappointed in their hope were
they, in their paradise, to embrace pale, weak shadows; for warm hearts they
would not find, since all the warmth of the heart would be concentrated in her
breast. Disconsolate, they would despair when they found pale lips, lacklustre
eyes, an impassive bosom, a limp handclasp; for all the redness of the lips and
the fire of the eyes and the heaving of the bosom and the promise of the
handclasp and the foreboding of the sigh and the seal of the kiss and the
trembling of the touch and the passion of the embrace – all – all would be united
in her who lavished upon me a wealth sufficient for a whole world, both here
and in the beyond. That’s how I have often thought of this matter. But every time
I think in this way I become warm, because I imagine her as warm. Although
warmth is usually considered a good sign, it does not follow that this way of
thinking will be accorded the distinction of being called ‘solid’. So now, for the
sake of variety, being myself cold I shall think coldly of woman. I shall try to
think of woman categorially.
80 Under what category must she be understood?
Under being-for-another. This is not, however, to be taken in the bad sense, as if
the one that was for me were also for another. Here, as always with abstract
thought, one must refrain from having any regard to experience; for otherwise, in
the present case, I would find, most curiously, that experience is both for and
against me. Here as always, experience is a most curious character, because it is
its nature always to be both for and against. So she is being-for-another. Here
again, but from another quarter, one must not be put off by experience, which
teaches us that one seldom encounters a woman who is truly being-for-another,
since a great many are generally speaking absolutely nothing, either for
themselves or for others. She shares this description with Nature, with anything
feminine at all. Thus Nature as a whole is only for-another; not in the
teleological sense in which the separate links in Nature exist for some other
particular link, but in the sense that all of Nature is for-another – for Spirit.
Similarly with particular things. Plant-life, for instance, unfolds its hidden
charms in all naivety and is only for-another. Likewise a puzzle, a charade, a
secret, a vowel, etc. are only for-another. And this can explain why, when God
created Eve, He let a deep sleep fall upon Adam; for woman is the man’s dream.
There is also another way in which this story teaches that woman is being-foranother. For it is said that Jehovah took a rib from the man’s side. Had he taken
something, say, from the man’s brain, woman would no doubt have remained a
being-for-another; the idea, however, would not have been to make her a figment
of the brain but something quite different. She became flesh and blood, but for
that very reason she falls under the description ‘Nature’, which is essentially
being-for-another. It is at the touch of love that she first awakens; before that she
is dream. Yet we can distinguish two stages in that dream existence: the first is
when love dreams about her, the second when she dreams about love.
As being-for-another, woman is characterized by pure virginity. For virginity is
a form of being which, in so far as it is a being-for-self, is really an abstraction
and it only appears for another. The same is true of feminine innocence. So one
can say that a woman in that state is invisible. And we know there was no image
of Vesta,
81
the goddess who most nearly represented authentic virginity. For the
form of this existence is aesthetic jealousy of oneself, just as Jehovah is ethically
jealous of himself,
82 and it will not allow there to be any image of it or even any
notion. It is this contradiction, that what is for-another is not, and only becomes
visible as it were with the other. Logically, there is nothing wrong with this
contradiction, and no one who knows how to think logically will be put off by it
but rejoice in it. Anyone who thinks illogically, however, will fancy that
whatever has being-for-another simply is, in the finite sense in which one can
say of a particular thing, ‘That’s something for me.’
This being of woman (for the word ‘existence’ already says too much, since
she does not subsist out of herself)
83
is rightly characterized as charm, an
expression suggesting vegetative life; she is like a flower, as the poets are fond
of saying, and even the spiritual is present in her in a vegetative manner. She is
wholly contained in categories of Nature, and so she is free only aesthetically.
She only becomes free in a deeper sense through the man, and that is why we
say [in Danish] at frie, and that is why the man ‘frees’ [frier].
84 Certainly the
woman chooses, but if we are thinking of this as the outcome of a long process
of deliberation, the choice is unfeminine. That’s why it is a humiliation to get a
refusal, because the individual in question has thought too well of himself, has
wanted to make another free without being able to. – There is a deep irony in
this situation. The for-another has the appearance of being the dominant party:
the man sues for her, the woman chooses. In terms of her concept a woman is the
vanquished one; in terms of the man’s he is the victor; and yet this victor bows
before the vanquished. Still, that’s quite natural and it is only boorishness,
stupidity and lack of erotic sensibility to ignore what is immediately presented in
this way. There is also a deeper reason. For the woman is substance, the man is
reflection. So she doesn’t choose, then, without further ado. The man sues, she
chooses. But the suing is a question and her choice is just an answer to a
question. In one sense the man is more than the woman, in another he is
infinitely less.
This being-for-another is pure virginity. If it makes an attempt to be itself in
relation to another being which is being-for-it, then the opposition manifests
itself in an absolute prudishness; but this opposition, too, shows that woman’s
essential being is being-for-another. Absolute devotion has as its diametrical
opposite absolute prudishness, which is invisible in a converse sense as the
abstraction against which everything breaks, but without this bringing the
abstraction to life. Femininity then takes on the character of abstract cruelty, an
extreme in caricature of authentic feminine refractoriness. A man can never be as
cruel as a woman. Consult mythology, fable and folk-tales and you will find this
corroborated. If one has to describe a principle of Nature whose mercilessness
knows no bounds, then it is a virginal being. Or one reads in horror of a young
woman who, unmoved, lets her suitors lay down their lives, something one finds
so often in the folk-tales of all nations. A Bluebeard kills all the girls he has
loved on the bridal night; but it is not the killing of them that he takes pleasure
in; on the contrary, his pleasure has gone before. That is where the concreteness
lies; it isn’t cruelty for cruelty’s sake. A Don Juan seduces them and runs away,
but it is seducing them he takes pleasure in, not running away; so it is not at all
this abstract cruelty.
Thus I see, the more I reflect on this matter, that my practice is in perfect
harmony with my theory. For my practice has always been permeated with the
conviction that woman is essentially being-for-another. That is why the moment
is of infinite importance here; for being-for-another is always a matter of the
moment. The moment may take a longer or a shorter time coming, but as soon as
it comes, what was originally being-for-another becomes a relative being, and
then it is all over. I am well aware that husbands, in another sense, say something
to the effect that the woman is being-for-another, that she is everything to them
for the whole of their lives. Of course one must give the husbands credit for that.
But really I believe it is something they delude one another into thinking. Every
class in society has, as a rule, certain conventional practices, and in particular
certain conventional lies. This sailor’s yarn must be reckoned among them. To
be a judge of the moment is not such an easy matter, and naturally what a person
who misjudges it lands himself in for the whole of his life is simply tedium. The
moment is everything, and in the moment the woman is everything. The
consequences I do not comprehend. Among them is the consequence of having
children. Now I fancy that I am a fairly consistent thinker, but even if I were to
go crazy I am not a man to consider this consequence; I simply do not
understand it; you need a husband for that.
Yesterday Cordelia and I visited a family at their summer home. The party kept
mostly to the garden, where we passed away the time in all sorts of physical
exercise. Among other things we played quoits.
85 When another gentleman who
had been playing with Cordelia had gone, I took the opportunity to take his
place. What a wealth of charm she displayed, even more seductive through the
becoming exertion of the game! What graceful harmony in the contradictions of
her movements! How light she was – like a dance over the meadows! How
vigorous, yet unopposed, deceiving the eye until equilibrium resolved
everything. How vehement her appearance, how challenging her glance! The
game itself naturally held a special interest for me. Cordelia seemed not to notice
it. A remark of mine to one of the spectators about the attractive custom of
exchanging rings struck down in her soul like a lightning bolt. From that
moment a higher radiance pervaded the whole situation, a deeper significance
permeated it, a greater energy kindled her. I held both rings on my stick. I paused
a moment. I exchanged a few words with the bystanders. She understood this
pause. I tossed the rings to her again. Soon she caught both of them on her stick.
As though inadvertently, she tossed them straight up into the air, so that it was
impossible for me to catch them. This toss was accompanied by a look full of
boundless temerity. There’s a story of how a French soldier who had campaigned
in Russia had his leg amputated at the knee because of gangrene. As soon as the
painful operation was over, he grabbed the leg by the foot, threw it in the air and
shouted: ‘Vive I’empereur!’ With the same kind of look, and more beautiful than
ever, she threw both rings into the air and said to herself: Long live love! I found
it inadvisable, however, to let her run riot in this mood, or to leave her alone in
it, for fear of the languor that so often ensues. I therefore remained quite calm
and compelled her with the help of the presence of those around us to continue
playing, as if I had noticed nothing. Conduct of that kind simply gives her more
resilience.
If one could expect any sympathy these days for such inquiries, I would pose
the prize question: ‘Aesthetically, who is the more bashful, a young girl or a
young matron, the ignorant or the knowledgeable? To which of them dare one
grant greater freedom?’ But such things don’t concern these earnest times of
ours. In Greece such an inquiry would have aroused general interest; the whole
state would have been in commotion, the young girls and young wives in
particular. No one would believe it nowadays, but nor would they believe it
nowadays if they were told of the famous contest waged between two Greek
girls and the extremely thorough inquiry it led to.
86 For in Greece one did not
treat these things lightly and irresponsibly. Yet everyone knows that Venus bears
a nickname as a result of this contest, and that all admire the image of Venus
which has immortalized her. A married woman has two periods in her life when
she is interesting: her earliest youth and then again, long after, when she has
become a great deal older. But she has also – this must not be denied her – a
moment when she is even more charming than a young girl, and inspires even
more respect; but it is a rare moment in life which need not be seen in life itself,
and perhaps never is so. I imagine her, then, healthy, blooming, luxuriantly
developed; she holds a child in her arms, on whom all her attentionis turned, in
whose contemplation she is lost. It is a picture one might call the most charming
human life has to offer; it is a Nature myth, which may therefore only be seen in
art, not in reality. Nor must there be any additional figures in the picture, no
setting, for that would only disturb. If one has resort to our churches one has
frequent opportunity to see a mother approaching with a child in her arms. Quite
apart from the disconcerting wail of the child, and the anxious thoughts the
wailing arouses about the parents’ expectations for the child’s future, the
surroundings are in themselves so confusing that, even if everything else were
perfect, the effect would be lost. One sees the father, and that is a great mistake
since it removes the myth, the enchantment; one sees – horrendo refero
87 – the
earnest choir of godparents, and one sees – simply nothing. Conceived as a
picture for the imagination it is the most charming thing of all. I am not without
courage and daring, nor recklessness enough to venture an assault – but if I saw
such an image in reality, I would be defenceless.
How Cordelia occupies me! Yet the time is soon over, for my soul constantly
requires rejuvenation. It is already as though I heard the cock crowing in the
distance. Perhaps she hears it too, but she believes it proclaims dawn. – Oh why
is a young girl so pretty, and why does it last so briefly? I could become quite
melancholy with this thought, and yet it is no concern of mine. Enjoy, don’t
chatter. Those who make a business of such reflections generally have no
enjoyment at all. However, letting the thought of it come out can do no harm; for
generally this sadness, not on one’s own but on others’ behalf, adds a little to
one’s male beauty. A sadness which dawns deceptively, like a misty veil, over
manly strength is part of the masculine erotic. In the woman the corresponding
quality is a kind of melancholy. – When a girl first gives herself totally it is all
over. I still approach a young girl with a certain anxiety; my heart throbs because
I feel the eternal power latent in her nature. That has never struck me in the
presence of a married woman. The modicum of resistance she tries, with artful
means, to put up is nothing. It’s as if the married woman’s cap should make a
greater impression than a young girl’s uncovered head. That is why Diana has
always been my ideal. That pure virginity, that absolute decorousness, has
always greatly engaged me. But while indeed occupied by her, I have always
looked at her askance. For I take it she really in no way deserved all the praise
she reaped for her virginity. She knew the role it played in her life; that is why
she preserved it. Also, I have heard mumblings in philological corners that she
retained an image of the terrible birth pangs her mother had endured. This is said
to have put her off and I can’t blame Diana for that, for I say with Euripides: I
would rather go to war three times than bear one child.
88 Now I couldn’t really
fall in love with Diana, but I don’t deny I’d give a lot for a conversation with
her, for what I might call a straight talk. She had to get used to all sorts of tricks.
Obviously my good Diana possesses, in one way or another, a knowledge that
makes her far less naive even than Venus. I wouldn’t bother spying on her in her
bath,
89 not at all, but I’d like to spy her out with my questions. If I were stealing
off to a tryst where I feared for my victory, I would prepare myself, arm myself,
mobilize all the spirits of love, by conversing with her. –
It has often been a matter of consideration for me what situation, what
moment, might be regarded as the most seductive. The answer to this naturally
depends on what one desires and how one desires and the way one has
developed. I go for the wedding-day and for one moment in particular. When she
stands decked out as a bride yet all her magnificence pales before her beauty, and
she too turns pale, when the blood stops, when her bosom rests, when the look
falters, when the foot is unsteady, when the virgin trembles, when the fruit
ripens; when heaven exalts her, when the seriousness gives her strength, when
the promise sustains her, when the prayer blesses her, when the myrtle wreath
crowns her; when the heart trembles, when the eyes are fixed on the ground,
when she hides in herself, when she belongs other than to the world in order
wholly to belong to it; when her bosom swells, when the living form sighs, when
the voice falters, when the tear quivers before the riddle is explained, when the
torch is lighted, when the bridegroom waits – then the moment has come. Soon it
will be too late. There is only one step left but it is all that a false step needs.
This moment makes even an insignificant girl significant, even a little Zerlina
becomes a subject. Everything must be composed, the biggest contrasts united in
the moment; if something is missing, especially one of the chief contrasts, the
situation immediately loses part of its seductiveness. There is a well-known
engraving. It represents a penitent. She looks so young and innocent that one is
almost embarrassed on her and her confessor’s behalf about what she can really
have to confess. She is lifting her veil a little, she is looking out into the world as
if seeking something she might on some later occasion have an opportunity to
confess, and of course one understands that indeed it is nothing more than
obligation out of consideration to – the father-confessor. The situation is really
most seductive, and since she is the only figure in the piece, there is nothing to
prevent one’s imagining the church in which all this takes place being so
spacious that several very different preachers could all preach here
simultaneously. Yes, the situation is really most seductive, and I have no
objection to being placed in the background, especially if the girl has nothing
against it. However, it will always be an extremely subordinate situation; after
all, it appears that it is not only in her relation to a father-confessor that the girl is
a child,
90 and it will take time before the moment comes.
Now have I, in my relationship with Cordelia, been constantly faithful to my
pact? That is to say, to my pact with the aesthetic. For that is what makes me
strong, the fact that I always have the idea on my side. It is a secret, like
Samson’s hair, which no Delilah shall wrest from me. Straightforwardly to
betray a young girl, that is something I certainly couldn’t endure. But the fact
that the idea, too, is there in motion, that it is in its service that I act and to its
service that I dedicate myself, that makes me strict with myself, an abstainer
from every forbidden enjoyment. Has the interesting always been preserved?
Yes, in this secret conversation I dare say it freely and openly. The engagement
itself was interesting precisely in not offering what is ordinarily understood by
the interesting. It preserved the interesting through the outward appearance
contradicting the inner life. Had I been secretly bound to her, it would only have
been interesting to the first power. This, however, is interesting to the second
power, and for that reason interesting for the first time for her. The betrothal
bursts, but by virtue of the fact that she herself cancels it in order to raise herself
to a higher sphere.
91 So it should be; for this is the form of the interesting which
will occupy her most.
September 16th
The bond burst; longingly, strong, daring, divine, she flies like a bird which is
allowed now for the first time to stretch its wings. Fly, bird, fly! Truly, if this
royal flight were a departure from me, my pain would be infinitely deep. As if
Pygmalion’s beloved were turned to stone again,
92
that is how it would be for
me. I have made her light, light as a thought; shouldn’t this, my thought, belong
to me? It would be something to despair over. A moment earlier it would not
have occupied me, a moment later it will not trouble me, but now – now – this
now which is an eternity to me. But she does not fly away from me. Fly, then,
bird, fly; rise proudly on your wings, glide through the soft realms of the air,
soon I am with you, soon I will be hiding myself with you in that deep solitude!
The aunt was somewhat taken aback by the news. However, she is too much
the free-thinker to want to coerce Cordelia, even though, partly to lull her into an
even sounder sleep, partly to confuse Cordelia a little, I have made some
attempts at getting her to take an interest on my behalf. As for that, she
otherwise shows me much sympathy; she has no notion of what good reason I
have to deprecate all sympathy.
She has got permission from the aunt to spend some time in the country; she is
to visit a family. It is very fortunate that she cannot straightaway surrender to an
excess of mood. It means she will be kept in a state of tension for a while yet by
all kinds of outside resistance. I keep up a tenuous communication with her with
the help of letters; that keeps our relationship alive. She must be made strong
now in every way; in particular the best will be to let her have a few flings at
eccentric contempt for people and the commonplace. Then when the day of
departure arrives, a dependable fellow will turn up as her coachman. They will
be joined outside the gate by my highly trusted servant. He accompanies them to
the appointed place and remains with her for her service and assistance in case of
need. Next to myself I know of no one better fitted for this than Johan. I have
myself arranged everything out there as tastefully as possible. Nothing lacks that
can serve in any way to beguile her soul and reassure it with a sense of luxurious
wellbeing.
My Cordelia!
So far the separate family cries of ‘Fire!’ have not joined in a general
capitohline city-war’s confusion.
93 Presumably you have already had to put up
with individual solos. Imagine the whole assembly of tea-and-rum and coffee
mesdames; imagine a lady presiding who forms a worthy counterpart to
Claudius’s immortal President Lars,
94 and you have a picture, a conception, and a
measure of what you have lost and with whom: being well thought of by good
people.
I enclose the famous engraving which represents President Lars. I couldn’t
purchase it separately, so I bought the whole of Claudius, tore it out and threw
away the rest, for how could I venture to trouble you with a gift that at this
moment has no meaning for you? Why shouldn’t I use every means to get hold
of what might give you pleasure just for one moment? Why should I let more get
mixed up in a situation than belongs to it? Nature may be given to such excesses,
and the person who is in thrall to all of life’s finite circumstances. But you, my
Cordelia, in your freedom you would hate it.
Your Johannes
Spring is the most beautiful time to fall in love, autumn the most beautiful to
reach the goal of one’s desires. In the autumn lies a sadness which is entirely in
keeping with the way the thought of a desire’s fulfilment courses through one.
Today I have been out at the country place where in a few days Cordelia will
find a setting in harmony with her soul. I myself do not want to share in her
surprise and pleasure over this; such erotic issues would only weaken her soul. If
she is alone in this, on the other hand, she will pass her time in reverie over such
things. Everywhere she will see allusions, hints, an enchanted world, but all of
this would lose its meaning if I stood by her side; it would make her forget that,
for us, the time is past when such things enjoyed in fellowship had meaning. The
surroundings must not inveigle her soul like a narcotic, but constantly allow it to
rise up out of them by looking upon them as a game of no significance compared
with what is to come. I intend in these days that remain to visit this place more
often to keep me in the mood.
My Cordelia!
I can now truly call you mine, no outward sign reminds me of my possession. –
Soon I shall truly call you mine. And when I hold you firmly in my arms, when
you entwine me in your embrace, we need no ring to remind us that we belong to
each other, for is not this embrace a ring that is more than a symbol? And the
more firmly this ring closes round us, the more inseparably it unites us, the more
freedom, for your freedom consists in being mine, as mine in being yours.
Your Johannes
My Cordelia!
While out hunting, Alpheus fell in love with the nymph Arethusa. She would
not grant his prayer but fled constantly before him, until on the island of Ortygia
she was changed into a fountain. So bitterly did Alpheus sorrow over this that he
was changed into a river in Elis on the Peloponnese. He did not forget his love,
however, but united himself beneath the sea with that fountain.
95
Is the time of
metamorphosis past? Answer: Is the time of love past? With what should I
compare your pure deep soul, which has no ties with the world, except with a
fountain? And have I not said to you that I am like a river that has fallen in love?
And do I not plunge now beneath the sea, now we are separated, to be united
with you? There under the sea we meet again, for it is in these depths that we
really belong together.
Your Johannes
My Cordelia!
Soon, soon you are mine. When the sun closes its searching eye, when history
is over and the myths begin, then it is not only my cloak I fling about me, I fling
the night about me just like a cloak and hasten to you and hearken to find you,
not by footfalls but by the beating of your heart.
Your Johannes
These days, when I cannot be with her in person whenever I want, the thought
has troubled me that it might occur to her at some moment to consider the future.
So far that hasn’t happened; I have been too good at drugging her aesthetically.
Nothing less erotic is imaginable than this talk of the future, the reason for which
is basically that people have nothing with which to fill the present. When I’m
there I have no fear of that either, for I can make her forget both time and
eternity. If one doesn’t know how to put oneself in rapport with a girl, one
should never get involved in trying to beguile, for then it will be impossible to
avoid the two reefs: questions about the future and a catechism on faith. Thus it
is quite right of Gretchen to hold a little examination of this kind for Faust,
96
since he had taken the imprudent step of playing the knight, and against an
assault of that kind a girl is always armed.
Now everything is, I think, in order for her reception; she must not want of
opportunity to admire my powers of memory, or rather, she must not have time
to admire it. Nothing has been overlooked which might have some significance
for her, while on the other hand, there is nothing there that could directly remind
her of me, while invisibly I am nevertheless present everywhere. But the effect
will largely depend on how she comes to see it for the first time. Here my
servant has received the most detailed instructions, and he is in his way a
complete virtuoso. He knows how to drop remarks carelessly to order; he knows
how to be ignorant, in short he is invaluable to me. – The location is as she could
wish. If one sits in the middle of the room, in both directions one has a view
beyond anything in the foreground, on both sides one has the endless horizon,
one is alone in the wide ocean of the atmosphere. If one approaches a row of
windows on the one side, there far on the horizon a forest curves in on itself like
a wreath, delimiting and enclosing. That’s how it should be. What does love
love? – an enclosure; wasn’t Paradise itself an enclosed place, a garden towards
the east? – But this ring closes itself too tightly about one – one comes nearer the
window, a calm lake hides humbly amidst the higher ground encircling it. At its
edge lies a boat. A sigh from the fullness of the heart, a breath from thought’s
unrest – it frees itself from its moorings, it glides over the surface of the lake,
softly moved by the gentle breezes of inexpressible longing; one disappears into
the secretive solitude of the forest, cradled by the surface of the lake, which
dreams of the forest’s dark depths. One turns to the other side, where the open
sea spreads before the unhindered eye, pursued by thoughts with nothing to
detain them. – What does love love? Infinitude. – What does love fear?
Limitation. – Behind this large salon is a smaller room, or rather a closet; for
whatever that room in the Wahl house was on the verge of being, this is it. The
similarity is striking. A carpet woven of osiers covers the floor; before the sofa
stands a small tea-table, on it a lamp, the image of the one at home. Everything
is the same, only more splendid. It’s a difference I feel I can permit myself with
the room. In the salon stands a piano, a very plain one, but reminiscent of the
fortepiano at the Jansens’. It is open; on the music stand a little Swedish melody
lies open. The door into the entry stands ajar. She comes in by the door at the
back of the room – Johan has been instructed in this. Her eye then takes in the
closet and the piano together. Memory awakens in her soul; just then Johan
opens the door. – The illusion is perfect. She goes into the closet. She is pleased,
of that I’m sure. As her glance falls on the table she sees a book. The same
instant Johan picks it up as if to lay it to one side, as he adds casually, ‘The
master must have forgotten this when he was out here this morning.’ From that
she first learns that already this morning I have been out there, and then she
wants to see the book. It is a German translation of Apuleius’s well-known
Cupid and Psyche.
97
It is no poetic work, but nor should it be; for it is always an
insult to a young girl to offer her a piece of genuine poetry, as if she herself were
not poetical enough in such moments to absorb the poetry hidden in them before
it is consumed by another’s thought. This is not something people generally
consider, and yet it is so. – She will read this book and thus the purpose is
achieved. – In opening it at the place where it was last read she will find a little
sprig of myrtle; she will also find that it means rather more than a bookmarker.
98
My Cordelia!
What fear? When we keep together we are strong, stronger than the world,
stronger than the gods themselves. You know, there once lived a race on earth
who, though human, were each sufficient unto themselves and did not know the
inner union of love.
99 Yet they were mighty, so mighty that they would storm
heaven. Jupiter feared them and divided them up so that one became two, a man
and a woman. Now it happens sometimes that what was earlier united is brought
together once more in love; such a union is stronger than Jupiter. Then they are
not merely as strong as was the individual but even stronger, for love’s union is
an even higher one.
Your Johannes
September 24th
The night is still – the clock strikes a quarter to twelve. – The keeper by the
gate blows his benediction out over the countryside. It echoes back from
Blegdammen – he goes inside the gate – he blows again, it echoes even further. –
Everything sleeps in peace, except love. So rise up, you secret powers of love,
unite in this breast! The night is silent – a solitary bird breaks this silence with its
screech and the beat of its wings as it skims over the dewy field down the
sloping bank to its rendezvous – accipio omen!
100 How full of omens all Nature
is! I take warning from the flight of the birds, from their cries, from the playful
slap of the fish against the water’s surface, from their disappearance beneath the
depths, from a distant barking of dogs, from a wagon’s faraway clatter, from
footfalls that echo from afar. No ghosts do I see in this night hour; I do not see
what has been, but what shall be, from the bosom of the lake, from the kiss of
the dew, from the mist that spreads over the earth and hides its fruitful embrace.
Everything is image; I myself am a myth about myself, for is it not rather as a
myth that I hasten to this meeting? Who I am has nothing to do with it.
Everything finite and temporal is forgotten, only the eternal remains, the power
of love, its longing, its bliss. – My soul is attuned as a drawn bow, my thoughts
ready as arrows in a quiver, not poisoned yet well able to mingle with blood.
How vigorous is my soul, healthy, happy, all-present like a god. – Her beauty
came from Nature. I thank you, wonderful Nature! Like a mother you have
watched over her. Accept my thanks for your care. She was undefiled. I thank
you, you people to whom she owed that. Her development was my handiwork –
soon I shall enjoy my reward. – How much have I gathered into this one moment
which is now at hand. Death and damnation if I should fail! –
I don’t see my carriage yet. – I hear the crack of a whip, it’s my coachman. –
Drive for dear life, even if the horses drop dead, but not one second before we
are there.
September 25th
Why can’t a night like that be longer? If Alectryon could put a foot wrong,
101
why can’t the sun be compassionate enough to do the same? Still, now it is over
and I want never to see her again. Once a girl has given away everything, she is
weak, she has lost everything; for in the man innocence is a negative factor,
while for the woman it is her whole worth. Now all resistance is impossible, and
only when it is there is it beautiful to love; once it is gone, love is only weakness
and habit. I do not wish to be reminded of my relation to her; she has lost her
fragrance, and the time has gone when, for pain over her untrue lover, a girl is
transformed into a heliotrope.
102
I will not take leave of her; nothing disgusts me
more than a woman’s tears and a woman’s prayers, which change everything yet
are really of no consequence. I have loved her, but from now on she can no
longer engage my soul. If I were a god I would do for her what Neptune did for a
nymph: change her into a man.
103
Nevertheless, it would really be worthwhile knowing whether one couldn’t
poetize oneself out of a girl, whether one couldn’t make her so proud that she
imagined it was she who had wearied of the relationship. It could become a quite
interesting epilogue, which in its own right might be of psychological interest,
and besides that, enrich one with many erotic observations.
PART TWO
CONTAINING THE PAPERS OF B: LETTERS TO A
Les grandes passions sont solitaires, et les transporter
au désert, c’ est les rendre à leur empire.
Chateaubriand
1 THE AESTHETIC VALIDITY OF MARRIAGE
My Friend!
These lines your eyes first fall upon were written last. Their aim is to try once
more to compress into letter form the extensive inquiry commended to you
herewith. They are therefore of a piece with the lines that come last; together
these form an envelope and thus indicate externally what you will find many
proofs to convince you of within, that it is indeed a letter you are reading. The
idea of writing you a letter has been one I have been unwilling to give up, partly
because the time at my disposal has not permitted the more careful preparation
required of a treatise, partly because I was reluctant to forgo this opportunity to
address you in the more admonitory and urgent tones which the form of a letter
allows. You are far too adept in the art of speaking in altogether general terms
about anything, and without letting yourself be personally affected, for me to
tempt you into mobilizing your dialectical powers. […] As a public official I am
accustomed to writing in folio. That could have its advantages if it can contribute
to giving what I write a certain authority. The letter you hereby receive is of
some size: if weighed on the Post Office scales it would have been an expensive
one. On the fine scales of cultivated criticism it could prove very insignificant.
So I beg you not to use either of these scales: not the Post Office’s, for the letter
is to be received into your own charge and not for further conveyance; nor that
of criticism, since I would hate to see you incur such an uncongenial
misunderstanding.
If this inquiry came to any other person’s eyes but your own, it would strike
them as exceedingly strange and pointless; if it were a married man he might
exclaim with the bonhomie of the paterfamilias, ‘Yes, marriage, that’s life’s
aesthetic.’ If it were a young man he might rather vaguely and unreflectingly
chime in, ‘Yes, love, you are life’s aesthetic.’ But neither of them would be able
to grasp why it should occur to me to want to save the aesthetic reputation of
marriage. Indeed, rather than earning the gratitude of actual or aspiring
husbands, I would no doubt invite their suspicion. For to defend is to indict. And
I would have you to thank for that, since I myself have never been in doubt
about it; yes, you who in spite of all your bizarrerie I love like a son, a brother, a
friend, who I love with an aesthetic love, since perhaps sometime you will find a
centre for your eccentric movements; who I love for your impetuosity, your
passions, your foibles; who I love with the fear and trembling of a religious love
because I see in what ways you have gone astray, and because for me you are
something quite other than mere appearance. Yes, when I see you lunge to the
side, see you rear like a wild horse, starting back and then plunging forward, yes,
I refrain then from any pedagogical frippery but think of a horse that is
unbroken, and see, too, the hand that holds the reins, see the scourge of an
overpowering fate raised above your head. And when now at last this inquiry has
come to hand, perhaps you will say, ‘Yes, undeniably it is a monstrous task he
has set himself, but now let us see how he has coped with it.’
Perhaps I speak to you too mildly; perhaps I bear with you too much, perhaps I
should have wielded more of that authority which for all your pride I do wield
over you; or perhaps I should not have involved myself with you in this topic at
all; for you are in many ways a pernicious person and the more one has to do
with you the worse it becomes. You are not really an enemy of marriage, but you
abuse your ironic glance and sarcastic taunting to make a mockery of it. I will
admit to you that in this respect you are not tilting at the air, that you strike
home, and that you are extremely observant. But I will also say that this is
perhaps what is wrong with you. Your life will be nothing but approach-runs.
You will no doubt reply that that is better, after all, than to travel on the train of
triviality and lose oneself like an atom in the social throng. As I say, you cannot
say that you hate marriage, for your thoughts have no doubt never really come
that far, at least not without the very idea scandalizing you, so you will have to
forgive me for assuming that you have not thought the matter through. What you
are drawn to is the first rapture of love. You know how to drown and hide
yourself in a dreamy, love-intoxicated clairvoyance. All around yourself you
spin the finest spider’s web and then lie in wait. But you are not a child, not a
waking consciousness, and the look in your eye means something else; but for
you that is enough. You love the accidental. A smile from a pretty girl in an
interesting situation, a captured glance, that is what you are after, that is a theme
for your idle imagination. You who always make so much of being the observer
must put up with being an object of observation in return. I will remind you of a
case in point. A pretty young girl who happened (for naturally this had to be
stressed, that you had no idea of her social standing, name, age, and so on) to be
seated beside you at table was too prim to want to bestow you a glance. You
were perplexed for a moment as to whether it was simply prudery or whether
there wasn’t some embarrassment mixed up with it, which when properly
illuminated, might present her in an interesting situation. She sat opposite a
mirror in which you could see her. She cast a shy glance at it without guessing
that your eye had already taken up residence there; she blushed when your eye
met hers. Things like that you preserve as accurately as a daguerreotype and
register just as quickly, just half a minute even in the worst weather, as you
know.
Alas! you are indeed a strange being. Child one moment, old man the next, at
one moment reflecting with tremendous seriousness upon the most exalted
scientific problems, on how you will give your life to them, the next a lovestruck fool. From marriage, however, you are a long way off, and I hope your
guardian angel stops you going astray; for sometimes I seem to detect signs in
you of wanting to play at being a little Zeus. You are so exclusive in your love
that you no doubt fancy that any girl should count herself lucky to be your
sweetheart even for a week. That gives you your studies in the amorous to
pursue along with aesthetics, ethics, metaphysics, world-politics, etc. It is
impossible really to be angry with you; the evil in your case, as in the medieval
conception, has a certain admixture of good nature and the childlike. As for
marriage, you have always remained simply an observer. There is something
treacherous in wanting only to observe. How often have you not – yes I admit, it
amused me – how often have you not also plagued me with your stories of how
you have sneaked your way first into the one then into another husband’s
confidence, in order to see how deeply he had become stuck in the mire of
married life. To steal your way into people, that’s where you have a truly great
gift, I do not deny it, or at the same time that it is a proper entertainment to hear
you recount the results and to witness your uncontained joy every time you can
bring some really fresh observation to the market. But frankly your
psychological interest lacks seriousness and is more like hypochondriacal
curiosity.
But now to the matter in hand. There are two things in particular I must regard
as my task. To show the aesthetic significance of marriage, and to show how the
aesthetic element can be sustained in the face of life’s manifold obstacles.
However, so that you can devote yourself the more safely to any edification the
reading of this little essay might possibly bring you, I will prefix short polemical
prologues to the discussion of these points in which due consideration will be
given to your sarcastic observations. But in this way I hope also to have paid my
dues to the pirate states thus to be left in peace at my vocation, for it is indeed
my vocation as a husband to fight for marriage – pro aris et focis [for hearth and
home]. And I assure you the affair is so close to my heart that I, who otherwise
feel little temptation to write books, could really be tempted if I could hope to
save even a single marriage from whatever hell it may have plunged into, or to
make a few people better able to bring to fruition the most beautiful task set for a
person.
To be on the safe side, I will occasionally allude to my wife and my
relationship with her, not because I would make so bold as to present our
marriage as the exemplary norm, but partly because poetic portrayals plucked
out of thin air have, through their gener ality, no particular power to convince,
and partly because it is important for me to show how it is possible to preserve
the aesthetic even in everyday circumstances. […] One thing I thank God with
all my soul for is that she is the only one I have ever loved, the first. And one
thing I pray God with all my heart for is that He will give me the strength never
to want to love another. This is a domestic prayer in which she joins me; for
every feeling, every mood, acquires a higher meaning for me by my making her
party to it. All feelings, even the highest religious ones, can acquire a certain
spaciousness and ease when one is always agreed in them. In her presence I am
at once priest and congregation. And if I should once in a while be so unloving
as not to remember this good, so ungracious as not to give thanks for it, she will
remind me. For mark well, my young friend! what we have is not the dalliance
of the first days of infatuation, or attempts at experimental eroticism, of the kind
in which practically everyone in the days of engagement has posed himself and
the loved one the question whether she hasn’t been in love before or he hasn’t
loved someone before. It is life’s earnest, and yet it is not cold, unbecoming,
unerotic, unpoetic. And in truth, that she really loves me and that I really love
her, are things I have very much at heart. Not, of course, that our marriage has
not in the passage of years become as stable as most others, but for me this is a
matter of the continual rejuvenation of our first love. […] This rejuvenation […]
is not just a sad backward glance, or the poetic memory of an experience which
is really only a way of deluding oneself – all things of that kind sap one’s energy.
This is an activity. The time when one has to be content with memories can
come all too soon; life’s fresh spring should be kept open as long as possible.
You, on the contrary, really live from theft. You creep up on people unawares,
steal from them their moments of happiness, their most beautiful moments, put
this phantom-image into your pocket […] and present it whenever you want.
[…] You think […] they should be grateful to you because from your study of
lighting effects and by your captivating turn of phrase you have let them appear
transfigured in those exalted moments into something larger than life. Perhaps
they lose nothing, and one may even surmise that they might possibly retain a
memory of these things, which always causes them pain. But you lose. You lose
your time – your peace of mind – your patience to live; for you well know how
impatient you are. […] There is an unrest in you over which your consciousness
nevertheless soars light and clear. Your whole soul is gathered at that point. Your
mind draws up a hundred plans, everything is prepared for the assault. Should it
fail in one direction, instantly your well-nigh diabolical dialectic is ready to
explain that away as necessary part of the new plan of operation. You hover
constant! over yourself and however decisive each step you take, you are ready
with an interpretation which with a word can change everything. And then there
is the whole embodiment of the mood: your eyes sparkle, or rather it is as though
a hundred watchful eyes were simultaneously shining, a fleeting blush passes
rapidly over your face; you have full confidence in your calculations, and yet
still wait with a terrible impatience – yes, my dear friend, I really think that in
the final analysis you delude yourself; all this talk of catching a person in his
moment of happiness, it is only your own exalted mood that you capture. You
are so wrought up that you are fabricating things. That is why I thought it was
not so harmful for others. For you it is absolutely harmful.
And underlying this is there not after all a monstrous breach of faith? You say
people do not concern you yet should thank you for turning them, through this
contact with them, not into swine as Circe did
1 but from swine into heroes. You
say it would be quite different if there were someone who really confided in you
but that so far you have never met such a person. Your heart is moved, you melt
with inward agitation at the thought of sacrificing everything for him. Nor will I
deny that you have a certain kindly disposition to help, that the way you support
the needy, for example, is truly beautiful, and that in the gentleness you display
now and then there is something noble. Nevertheless I think that there lurks here
a certain superiority. […] You once told me how while out walking you came up
behind two poor women. Maybe my own account here of what happened lacks
the vividness of yours when you rushed up to me possessed only of this thought.
They were two women from the poorhouse. They’d perhaps seen better days, but
all that was forgotten and the poorhouse is not exactly the place to foster hope.
While one of them took and offered the other a pinch of snuff, she said, ‘If only
someone had five dollars.’ Perhaps this bold wish, which reverberated
unanswered over the slopes up to the ramparts, surprised even herself. You
approached. Before taking the decisive step you had already taken out your
wallet and extracted a five-dollar bill, so that the situation should remain duly
flexible and she should not suspect anything too soon. You approached with an
almost subservient civility, as befits a ministering spirit; you gave her the five
dollars and vanished. You revelled in the thought of the impression it would have
on her, whether she would see this as some divine dispensation, or whether her
mind would rather, perhaps grown defiant through much suffering, turn almost
with contempt against a divine governance that took on the form here of pure
accident. You told me that this prompted you to consider whether the wholly
accidental fulfilment of such an accidentally expressed wish could cause
someone to despair because of its negating the reality of life in its deepest roots.
Thus what you wanted was to play the part of fate, what you really revelled in
were the multifarious thoughts you could spin out of the situation. Now I admit
you are well suited to the part of fate, to the degree one links this word to the
notion of the greatest inconstancy and caprice. For myself, I am content with a
less superior appointment in life. Moreover, you can see in this case an example
that might enlighten you on just how far you do not harm people with your
experiments. It can look as though the advantage were on your side; you have
given a poor woman five dollars, fulfilled her highest wish. And yet you yourself
admit that its effect on her could just as well be to make her, as Job’s wife
advised him to do, curse God. You may say these consequences are not under
your control, and that if one has to calculate consequences in this way one
cannot act. But I will reply, yes, one can indeed act. If I’d had five dollars I too
might have given them to her, but I would also have been very much aware of
not behaving experimentally; I would remain convinced that divine providence,
whose poor instrument I felt myself that instant to be, would surely arrange
everything for the best, and that I had nothing to reproach myself for. […]
The eagerness you exhibit can be praiseworthy enough, but can you not see
how increasingly clear it is that what you lack, lack entirely, is faith? Instead of
saving your soul by putting everything into God’s hands, instead of making this
short-cut you prefer an endless detour which may never lead you to your goal.
To this you will no doubt say, ‘Yes, that means you need never act.’ I would
reply, ‘Of course you must, when you know in yourself that you have a place in
the world which is yours and where you should concentrate all your activity. But
acting as you do borders on insanity.’ You will say that if you had just stood by
and let God take care of things the woman might not have been helped. I would
reply, ‘Possibly, but you would have been helped, and the woman too if she
entrusted herself to God.’ And do you not see that if you really put on your
travelling-boots and journeyed out into the world, wasting your time and energy,
you would miss the chance of all other activity, which may come to torment you
again later on? But, as I said, is this capricious way of living not a breach of
faith? It may look as if journeying around the world to find the poor woman
showed an extraordinary, an unprecedented degree of constancy, nothing the
least egoistic motivated you, it was not as when a lover travels in search of the
loved one, not at all, it was pure sympathy. I reply, ‘Certainly you should take
care not to call that feeling egoism; it is your usual rebellious lack of shame.’
Everything established by divine or human law you despise, and to free yourself
from it you grasp hold of the accidental, as in this case a poor woman unknown
to you. And as for your sympathy, perhaps it was pure – for your experiment.
[…]
As I have said, what you want to be is – fate. But now wait a moment. I do not
mean to preach to you, but there is a seriousness in you for which I know you
still have an unusually deep respect; anyone with the power to evoke it in you, or
enough confidence in you to let it come to the surface, would see in you today, I
know, a quite different person. Imagine, to take the highest we can, imagine that
the almighty creator of all things, that God in heaven were in this way simply to
posit Himself as a riddle for man, were to let the whole human race hover in this
fearful ignorance. Would not something deep inside you rebel in resentment
against this, could you stand such agony, could you stand the very thought of
such a horror, even just for a moment? Yet it is almost, dare one say it, as if God
Himself were haughtily to have declared, ‘What care I for man?’ But that is why
it is not so. And when I myself say that God is incomprehensible, it is because
my soul is raised to the heights; it is precisely in the most blessed moments that I
say the word – incomprehensible – because His love is incomprehensible,
incomprehensible because his love surpasses all understanding.
2
[…] But bear in
mind your life is passing; there will come a time even for you when it draws to
its close, when you are offered no further ways out in life, when recollection is
all that is left. Yes, recollection, but not in the way you so much love it, this
mixture of poesy and truth, but the serious and faithful recollection of
conscience. Take care that it does not unroll a personal record, not indeed of
genuine crimes, but of wasted possibilities, phantom-images which it will be
impossible for you to chase away. You are still young, the suppleness of your
spirit is becoming to youth and amuses the eye for a while. One is struck at the
sight of a clown whose joints are so pliant as to repeal the necessity of human
gait and posture. That, spiritually speaking, is how you are, you can just as well
stand on your head as your feet, for you everything is possible and with this
possibility you can surprise others and yourself. But it is unhealthy, and for the
sake of your own peace of mind I beg you to watch out that your advantage does
not become a curse. No one convinced of something can turn himself and
everything else upside down at will in this manner. I am warning you, therefore,
not about the world but about yourself and I am warning the world about you.
This much is certain: had I a daughter of an age where there could be any
question of her being influenced by you, I would most assuredly warn her, the
more so if she were also intellectually gifted. And if there were no reason to
warn her against you, then I myself, who nevertheless imagine I might be your
match, if not in suppleness then at least in firmness and constancy, if not in the
variable and brilliant then at least in steadiness – then I myself, with a certain
reluctance, sometimes actually feel that you are corrupting me, that I am letting
myself be carried away by your exuberance, by the apparently good-natured wit
with which you mock everything, that I am letting myself be borne away into
this aesthetic-intellectual intoxication in which you live. In a way, then, I feel to
some degree uncertain towards you, at times being too severe, at others too
indulgent. However, that is not so strange, for you are the epitome of all
possibility; so that one may see in you the possibility at one moment of your
own ruin, at another of your own salvation. Every mood, every thought, good or
evil, cheerful or sad, you pursue to its farthest limit, yet more in abstraction than
concretely, so the pursuit is itself more like a mood from which nothing results
except the knowledge of it, though not enough to make it more difficult or easy
next time to abandon yourself to that same mood; for you keep it as a constant
possibility. So it is almost as though you could be reproached for everything and
nothing at all, because it is and yet is not attributable to you. You admit or don’t
admit, according to circumstances, to having had such a mood. But you are not
available for any charge. The important thing for you is that you have had the
mood completely, with proper pathos.
But it was the aesthetic significance of marriage I was to deal with. That
inquiry might seem unnecessary, to be something everyone would concede as
having been sufficiently demonstrated. Haven’t knights and adventurers for
centuries withstood unbelievable trials and tribulations to end up in the quiet
peace of a happy marriage? Haven’t novelists and their readers for centuries
worked their way through one volume after another to come to a halt with a
happy marriage? And hasn’t one generation after another endured again and
again four acts of trials and intrigues just because there was some likelihood of a
happy marriage in the fifth? However, these huge exertions have accomplished
very little for the glorification of marriage, and I very much doubt whether there
is anyone who has felt that reading such works has qualified him to fulfil the
task he has set himself, or felt himself oriented in life. For this is precisely what
is pernicious and unhealthy about such writings, that they end where they should
begin. After the many twists of fate they have overcome, the lovers finally fall
into each other’s arms, the curtain falls, the book ends, but the reader is none the
wiser. […] What is true in [these works], the properly aesthetic element, is the
fact that love is put to work, that this feeling is represented as fighting its way
through an opposite. What is false in them is that the struggle, this dialectic, is
entirely external, and that love comes out of the struggle as abstract as it entered
into it. Once there is a proper appreciation of love’s own dialectic, of its
pathological struggle, of its relation to the ethical, to religion, there will in truth
be no need of hard-hearted fathers, maidens’ bowers, or enchanted princesses
and ogres and monsters to give love enough to do. Nowadays one seldom meets
such cruel fathers or frightful monsters, and to the extent that recent literature
models itself on the earlier it is really money that has become the medium of
opposition through which love moves, and again we struggle through four acts if
there is reasonable prospect of a rich uncle dying in the fifth.
However, performances like these are less frequent, and recent literature is on
the whole fully occupied with ridiculing love in that abstractly immediate form
found in the world of the romance. […] [But] how far has the age which
demolished romantic love succeeded in replacing it with anything better? First I
shall offer some criteria of romantic love. One could say, in one word, that it is
immediate, that to see her and to love her were one and the same; or, though she
saw him just once through a slit in the closed window of her maiden’s bower,
from that moment she loved him and him alone in the whole world. The
immediacy of romantic love is revealed by its dependence on natural necessity. It
is based on beauty, in part on sensual beauty, in part on the beauty that can be
depicted through, in, and with the sensual, not in the way that some thoughtprocess is needed to bring it to light, but as if constantly on the point of
expressing itself on its own, peeping out through the sensual. Though based
essentially on the sensual, this love still has a nobility by virtue of the
consciousness of the eternal it takes up in itself. For what distinguishes love
from lust is its having the stamp of the eternal. […] For the sensual is the
instantaneous. [It] seeks instant satisfaction, and the more refined it is, the better
it knows how to make the moment of pleasure into a little eternity. [While] the
true eternity in love, as in the truly ethical way of life, is what really first delivers
love from out of the sensuous. But to bring about this true eternity there must be
a determination of the will; of which more later.
The weakness of romantic love is something our own age has grasped very
clearly. Its ironical polemic against it has also on occasion been directly
amusing; whether it has remedied the defects and what it has put in its place we
shall now see. It can be said to have struck out on two paths, one of which is
shown at first glance to be a wrong one, that is, an immoral path; the other is
more respectable, but to my mind misses the deeper aspects of love. For if love
depends on the sensual, then anyone can see quite easily that this immediate
knightly loyalty is madness. What wonder, then, that women want emancipation
– one of many ugly phenomena in our time and for which men are to blame. The
eternal in love becomes an object of scorn, the temporal is retained, but the
temporal refined again in a sensual eternity, in the eternal instant of the embrace.
What I say here applies not only to this or that seducer slinking about in the
world like a beast of prey; no, it befits a numerous chorus of often highly gifted
persons, and it is not only Byron who declares love to be heaven, marriage hell.
3
One now sees clearly that what we have here is a reflection, something romantic
love lacks. The latter can happily accept the blessing of the Church as one more
beautiful celebration, yet without this having any significance for it as such. On
the basis of this reflection the love now in question has, with the fearful
unfeeling fixity of intellect, come up with a new definition of unhappy love,
4
namely to be loved when one is no longer in love, rather than be in love and not
have one’s love requited. And in truth, if those who go this way knew just what
profundity lies in these few words, they would recoil; for apart from all its
experience, shrewdness and sophistication, it also contains an inkling of the
existence of a conscience. […] This direction is of course absolutely immoral,
but on the other hand it brings us in one way a step nearer our goal, in thought;
in a sense it lodges a formal protest against marriage. In a sense this same
direction tries to put on a slightly more decent exterior, so it does not just confine
itself to the single instant but extends this to a longer period, yet in such a way
that instead of taking up the eternal in its consciousness, it takes up the temporal,
or entangles itself in this opposition between the eternal and the idea of a
possible change in time. It thinks it is possible to put up with living together for
quite a while but wants to keep a way out open so that if a happier choice
appeared it would still be possible to choose that. It makes marriage into a civil
arrangement; one only has to notify the appropriate authority that this marriage
is now over and a new one entered into, just as one gives notice of a change of
address. Whether this is an advantage for the State, I leave undecided; for the
individual it must be a truly remarkable situation. Hence one does not often see
it in fact, though the threat is constantly there in the times. Indeed it would
require shamelessness of a high degree – I do not think the word is too strong –
just as much as it would betray a frivolity bordering on depravity, especially on
the part of the female party to this association.
However, there is a quite different tendency of mind which can easily come
upon a similar idea, and since it is very characteristic of our time I think I should
deal with it here. Such a plan can in fact originate in either an egoistic or a
sympathetic melancholy. There has been enough talk now of the frivolity of our
age; I think it high time to speak a little of its melancholy, and I trust that this
will make everything clearer. For is not melancholy the defect of our time, is this
not what reverberates even in its frivolous laughter, is it not melancholy that has
bereft us of the courage to command, the courage to obey, the strength to act, the
confidence to hope? And now when the good philosophers are doing everything
they can to intensify the actual, will we not soon be so crammed with it that we
choke? Everything is cut away except the present; little wonder then that in one’s
constant anxiety about losing it one does lose it. Now, it is true enough that we
ought not to vanish in a fleeting hope, and that this is not the way we are to be
transfigured on high; but for real enjoyment one must have air and it isn’t only in
the moment of sorrow that the heavens must be held open, it is important to have
an unobstructed view even in times of joy and the double doors thrown wide.
[…] If enjoyment were the main thing in life I would sit at your feet to learn, for
in this you are a master. At one moment you can become an old man in order to
suck in through the funnel of memory, in slow draughts, what you have
experienced, at another you are in the first blush of youth, flushed with hope; at
one moment masculine, at another feminine; now you enjoy immediately, now
you enjoy reflecting on your enjoyment, now reflecting on the enjoyment of
others; at one moment you enjoy abstaining from enjoyment, at another you
enjoy abandoning yourself to it; your mind is open, accessible as a city that has
capitulated, reflection is silenced and every step of the intruders echoes in the
empty streets, yet there will always be a little outpost left over, observing; and
then your mind is closed again and you barricade yourself in, unapproachable
and intractable. This is how it is, and you will see also how egoistic your
enjoyment is, and that in fact you never abandon yourself, never let others enjoy
you. […]
Naturally the egoistic kind [of melancholy] fears for itself, and like all
melancholy it is self-indulgent. It has a certain exaggerated deference for, a
secret horror of, a lifelong alliance. ‘What can one count on? Everything can
change. Perhaps this being whom I now almost worship will change; perhaps
fate will tie me to another that is truly the ideal I dreamed of.’ Like all
melancholy it is defiant and knows it. ‘Perhaps my tying myself irrevocably to
one person may make this being I’d otherwise love with all my soul intolerable,
perhaps, perhaps, and so on.’ The sympathetic melancholy is more painful and
also somewhat nobler: it fears for itself for the other’s sake. ‘Who can be sure
one cannot change? Perhaps what I now consider good in me may vanish,
perhaps what the beloved finds captivating in me, and which I want to hold on to
for her sake, can be taken from me, and now she stands there, disappointed,
tricked; perhaps a brilliant prospect opens for her, she is tempted, she doesn’t
resist the temptation – good God, I’d have that on my conscience; I have nothing
to reproach her for, it is me that has changed, I forgive her everything if only she
can forgive me for being so incautious as to let her take such a decisive step.
Although I know quite well that far from talking her round I warned her against
me, it was her own free decision, but perhaps it was this very warning that
tempted her, made her see in me a better being than I am, etc. …’ It is easy to see
how this way of thinking is no better served by a ten-year alliance than a fiveyear one, […] that such a way of thinking is only too well aware of the meaning
of the phrase ‘sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof’.
5
It is an attempt to live
each day as though that day were decisive, as though every day were
examination day. For this reason the widespread tendency today to neutralize
marriage is not, as in the Middle Ages, because unmarried life is considered
more perfect, but is due to cowardice and self-indulgence. It is also evident that
contracting marriages for a definite period is of no avail, since such marriages
involve just the same difficulties as do those contracted for a lifetime and, far
from bestowing on the parties the strength to live, on the contrary they sap the
inner energy of married life, loosen the power of the will, and diminish the
blessing of trust that marriage possesses. Also it is already clear, and will later
become even more so, that associations of this kind are not marriages, since
although contracted in the sphere of reflection they have nevertheless not
attained the consciousness of the eternal, as has the ethical way of life, which is
what makes the alliance a marriage. This is also something you will entirely
agree with, for how often and how unerringly have those mood-tableaux not
been the well-deserved targets of your mockery and your irony (‘fortuitous love
affairs or love’s bad infinite’)?
6 As when someone with his sweetheart looks out
of the window at the moment when a young girl turns the corner into another
street, and it occurs to him that ‘it is her I’m really in love with’; but as he is
about to pick up the trail something interrupts, and so on.
The other expedient, the respectable way, would be the marriage of
convenience. The very name indicates that one has entered the sphere of
reflection. Certain persons, you among them, have always frowned at what is
meant here to be a marriage between immediate love and calculating reason –
for if one is to respect linguistic usage shouldn’t one really call it ‘the marriage
of reason’? You in particular tend always, with much ambiguity, to recommend
‘respect’ as a solid foundation for the tie of marriage. That it has to resort to such
an expedient as the marriage of convenience shows how thoroughly reflective
our age is. To the extent that such an alliance disavows genuine love, it has at
least the merit of consistency, but it also shows that it is no solution to the task.
A marriage of reason must therefore be looked upon as a kind of capitulation
made necessary by life’s complications. But how sad all the same that this
should be, as it were, the only comfort left for the poesy of our age, that despair
should be its only solace. For, clearly, it is indeed despair that makes such an
alliance admissible. It tends therefore to be entered into by people who have long
since reached the years of discretion and who have learnt that real love is an
illusion and its fulfilment a pious wish. Its concern, therefore, is with the prose
of life: making a living, social standing, etc. In so far as it has neutralized the
sensual in marriage it has the appearance of being moral; but one may ask all the
same whether this neutralizing is not as immoral as it is unaesthetic. Or if the
erotic is not entirely neutralized after all, then it is disheartened by a prosaic
rational consideration that one should be cautious, not too quick to pick and
choose, that life after all never gives us the ideal, that it is quite a respectable
match, etc. So the eternal which, as was shown above to be part of every
marriage, is not really present here, for a rational calculation is always temporal.
[…]
We have seen now how romantic love was based on an illusion, and how its
eternity was based on temporarlity, and that regardless of the knight’s remaining
fervently convinced of its absolute durability, there was still no assurance of this
inasmuch as love’s trials and temptations had hitherto been in an entirely
external medium. […] We have seen how, when taken up in the consciousness of
a reflective age, this immediate, beautiful, but also naive love had to become the
object of its scorn and its irony; and we have seen what such an age was reduced
to replacing it with. Marriage, too, it took up into its consciousness and declared
itself partly in favour of love, to the exclusion of marriage, partly in favour of
marriage, disavowing love. […]
With this our little inquiry (as no doubt I’m obliged to call what I’m writing,
though first I thought only of a longish letter) has reached the point where
marriage can first be viewed in the proper light. That marriage belongs to
Christianity, that for all the sensuality of the Orient and for all the beauty of
Greece the pagan nations have not perfected it, that in spite of its truly idyllic
elements even Judaism has been incapable of that – all this you will surely grant
without my having to go into details, all the more so since one only has to recall
that the contrast between the sexes has nowhere been made the object of a
reflection deep enough to do the opposite sex full justice. But within
Christianity, too, love had to suffer many a turn of fate before coming to where it
could see the profundity, beauty and truth that lie in marriage. Since, however,
the immediately preceding age and to some extent our own have been reflective,
it is not such an easy matter to demonstrate it. […]
In so far as it proved a defect of romantic love that it was not reflective, it
might perhaps seem proper to let true conjugal love begin with a kind of doubt.
That might seem all the more necessary, seeing it is a world of reflection that has
brought us to this point. I will not deny that a marriage might be artfully
accomplished in accordance with such a doubt, but the question remains whether
this is not already to alter the nature of marriage, seeing that it envisages a
divorce, after all, between marriage and love. The question is whether it can
really be part of marriage to annihilate the possibility of first love through doubt
of the possibility of realizing that love, and to make conjugal love both possible
and actual through this annihilation […] [or] whether the immediate, the first
love can be secured against this scepticism by being taken up into a higher
concentric immediacy, so that the conjugal love would not need to plough under
the beautiful expectations of the first love, but be itself first love with an
admixture of qualities which did not impoverish but enriched it. This is a
difficult point to prove, yet of immense importance if we are not to get a rift in
the ethical like that in the intellectual sphere between faith and knowledge. And
how beautiful, dear friend, you won’t deny it for your heart too has, after all, a
feeling for love, as your head is all too familiar with doubt – how beautiful it
would be if the Christian could call his God the God of love also in a way that
what he was thinking of was that inexpressibly blessed feeling, that eternal force
in the world – earthly love.
Seeing, then, that in the foregoing I have presented romantic love and
reflective love as discursive positions, we are now well placed properly to
appreciate how far the higher unity is a return to the immediate, how far the
latter contains, besides the ‘more’, also what lay in the first. It is now sufficiently
clear that reflective love constantly consumes itself and stops quite arbitrarily
now here, now there; it is clear that it points beyond itself to something higher,
but the question is whether the higher cannot straightaway combine with first
love. Now, this higher something is the religious, where rational reflection ends,
and just as for God everything is possible, so neither for the religious individual
is anything impossible. In the religious sphere love finds again the infinity for
which as reflective love it sought in vain. […]
The first thing I must do now is orient myself and particularly you in the
essential characteristics of marriage. Obviously, what really constitutes marriage,
what is its substance, is love, or if you want to be more explicit, the being in
love.
7 Take that away and a shared life is either just a satisfaction of sensual
desire or an association, a partnership in the interests of some goal. But love has
in itself precisely the quality of eternity, whether the love is of the superstitious,
romantic, chivalrous kind or the deeper moral and religious love which is filled
with an energetic and vital assurance.
Every estate has its traitors, so too matrimony. Naturally I do not mean the
seducers, for of course they have not entered into this holy estate (I trust the
mood this inquiry meets you in doesn’t cause you to smile at that expression); I
do not mean those who have left it through divorce, for they have at least had the
courage to be openly rebellious. No, I mean those who are rebels only in
thought, who do not even dare let it be expressed in action, these wretched
husbands who sit and sigh over the fact that love has long ago evaporated from
their marriage, these husbands who, as you once said of them, sit like lunatics
each in his matrimonial cell, and tug at the iron bars and fantasize about the
sweetness of betrothal and the bitterness of marriage, these husbands who, as
you rightly observe, are among those to congratulate, with a certain malicious
glee, anyone who gets engaged. I cannot describe how despicable they appear to
me, and how much unholy joy it gives me when such a husband confides in you
and pours out all his sufferings, rattling off all his lies about the happy first love,
and you say with a knowing look, ‘Yes, I’ll make sure not to get onto thin ice’,
and he is all the more embittered that he can’t drag you with him into a common
shipwreck. It is these husbands you so often refer to when you speak of a tender
paterfamilias with four blessed children he would sooner see in hell.
Now, if there was any truth in what they say, there would have to be a
separation of love and marriage, so that love is assigned to one moment in time
and marriage to another, love and marriage remaining incompatible. Then it
would not take long to discover to which moment of time love belonged – it
would be the engagement, the beautiful time of the engagement. […] If the
engagement really were the most beautiful time, truly I fail to see why they and
– if they are right – why anyone at all gets married. But still they do get married
with all possible petty-bourgeois precision, when it suits aunts and cousins,
neighbours and the people across the street, which betrays the same drowsiness
and apathy as looking on the engagement as the most beautiful time. […]
The substantial element in marriage is being in love; but which comes first:
love, or marriage so that being in love forms the sequel? This latter view has
enjoyed no little esteem among narrow-minded advocates of common sense, has
been preached not infrequently by shrewd fathers and even shrewder mothers
who themselves think they have learnt from experience and, to compensate for
the harm done, insist their children should learn from it too. This is the wisdom
of dove-fanciers who shut two doves up in a little cage, though they haven’t the
slightest sympathy for each other, and think they are bound to learn to come to
terms. This whole way of thinking is so narrow-minded that I mention it only as
a matter of form and also to remind you of much that, in this respect, you have
turned your back upon. […]
Marriage, then, is not meant to evoke love; on the contrary it presupposes it,
but presupposes it as something present, not past. Yet marriage has an ethical
and religious factor; being in love has not. For this reason marriage is based
upon resignation; being in love is not. Now unless we are to assume that
everyone makes two moves in their lives, first the (if I may so put it) pagan
move, where being in love belongs, and then the Christian move which is
expressed in marriage, unless one is to say that such love has to be left out by
Christianity it will have to be shown that love and marriage are compatible. […]
First, then, an examination of love. Here I shall fasten on an expression which
for me, despite your own and the whole world’s derision, has nevertheless
always had a beautiful meaning: first love (believe me, I am not going to give in
and presumably neither will you, so on this point there will be a peculiar discord
in our correspondence). When I myself mention this phrase I think of what is
among the most beautiful things in life; when you use it, it is the signal for the
whole line of your advanced observation-posts to open fire. Yet just as for me
there is nothing ludicrous about this phrase, and frankly I only put up with your
attack because I overlook it, so is there none of the sadness in it for me that it
can no doubt have for some. This sadness need not be morbid, for the morbid is
always the untrue and contrived. There is something pleasing and salutary in
someone’s having had ill-luck in his first love, when he has come to know its
pain but still kept true to his love, still kept faith in this first love; there is
something nice about it when, in the course of years, he sometimes now recalls it
quite vividly, and although his soul has been sound enough to, so to speak, take
leave of that kind of life in order to dedicate itself to something higher, there is
something pleasing about his then remembering it sadly as something that may
have fallen short of perfection but was very beautiful none the less. And this
sadness is far more healthy, more beautiful, and nobler than the prosaic
reasonableness which has long ago done with such childish pranks, or than this
devilish shrewdness of the song-master Don Basilio which fancies itself to be
health but is nevertheless the most wasting of sicknesses.
8 For what is a man
profited if he shall gain the whole world and lose his own soul?
9 For me there is
nothing at all sad in this phrase ‘first love’, or in any event only a small
seasoning of bittersweet. For me it is a battle-cry, and although now a married
man of several years, I have still constantly the honour to fight under first love’s
victorious banner.
For you, on the contrary, its significance, its over-and under-evaluation, has a
puzzling wave-like motion. At one moment you are altogether enthusiastic about
the first love. You are so infused with the energetic concentration implied in it
that it is the only thing you want. You are so kindled and inflamed, so burning
with love, so dreaming and fertile, as heavy as a rain cloud, as gentle as a
summer breeze, you have in short a lively conception of what it means for
Jupiter to visit the loved one in a cloud or in rain.
10 The past is forgotten, every
restriction removed. You expand more and more, you feel a softness and
pliability, every joint becomes supple, every bone a flexible sinew: as a gladiator
reaches up and stretches his body so as to exert complete control over it –
anyone would think this would deprive him of his energy and yet this voluptuous
torture is precisely the condition for his making proper use of his strength. You
are now in the state in which you enjoy the pure rapture of complete receptivity.
The softest touch is enough to thrill this invisible, fully stretched-out spiritual
body through and through. There is an animal which I have frequently pondered
upon, the jellyfish. Have you noticed how this gelatinous mass can extend itself
into a plane and then slowly sink or rise, so still and firm that one might think
one could step on it? Now it observes its prey drawing near, it makes itself
hollow, becomes a bag and sinks with immense speed deeper and deeper, using
this speed to snatch the prey into – not its bag, for it has no bag, but into itself,
for it is itself a bag and nothing more. It can now contract itself so much that it is
incomprehensible how it could possibly expand. This is just about how it is with
you, and you will simply have to forgive me for having no more beautiful animal
to compare you with, as also for the fact that you cannot perhaps quite help
smiling at yourself at the thought of being just a bag. At such moments it is ‘the
first’ you are pursuing, that alone is what you want, without suspecting that it is
contradictory to want the first constantly to return, and that it follows from this
that either you simply cannot have reached the first or you have had the first and
what you now see, what you now enjoy, is always merely a reflection of that
first; from which we may additionally note that you are in error in believing that
the first could be completely present in anything other than the first itself if only
one seeks rightly, and that, as far as your appealing to your own practice is
concerned, this too is a misunderstanding since you have never practised in the
right direction. […]
From you, then, one seeks in vain to learn what lies behind this mysterious
word ‘first’, a word that has had and always will have enormous significance in
the world. What significance the word has for the individual is really decisive for
his whole spiritual condition, just as its having no significance at all for him is
enough to show that his soul is not at all attuned to being touched and thrilled by
higher things. For those, on the other hand, for whom ‘first’ has acquired a
significance, there are two paths. Either ‘the first’ contains the promise of the
future, is the propulsive, infinite impulse in their lives; and these are the
fortunate individuals for whom the first is nothing but the present, though the
present as the first in its constant unfolding and rejuvenation. Or the first does
not urge the individual on within; the energy that is in the first does not become
the motive power in the individual but the power of repulsion that thrusts away.
These are the unfortunate individuals who are continually distancing themselves
more and more from ‘the first’. This, naturally, can never be something for
which the individual himself is totally without blame.
All affected by the idea of the first connect the word ‘first’ with a solemn
conception, and it tends only to be in connection with things at a lower level that
‘first’ means worst. You are rich in examples in this respect: the first proofs,
putting on a new dress coat for the first time, etc. The greater the likelihood
something can be repeated, the less significant the first becomes, the less
likelihood the more significant; while on the other hand, the more significant
whatever proclaims itself for the first time, the less likely it can be repeated.
Should there even be something eternal in it, then all likelihood that it can be
repeated vanishes. If, then, one has spoken with a certain wistful earnestness of
the first love as something that could never be repeated, this is no disparagement
of love but the most profoundly-felt extolling of it as the eternal power. […]
So much for the predicate we give love when we call it the ‘first’. I now go on
to consider first love more directly. […] It is surely obvious enough that the
philistines who think they have pretty well come to that point in life when the
thing to do is listen and look about (perhaps even in a newspaper) for a life
partner have already excluded themselves from first love, and that a philistinism
of this kind cannot be regarded as the state that precedes first love. It is, of
course, conceivable that Eros might be merciful enough to play a trick on such a
person by making him fall in love. ‘Merciful’ indeed, because it shows
extraordinary mercy to bestow the highest earthly good upon a person, and that
is what first love always is even when it is unhappy; but this will always be the
exception and his previous condition will remain just as unedifying. If one is to
believe the priests of music (and this is a matter in which one is almost bound to
believe them), and if in their company one were also to hearken to Mozart, then
surely the state preceding first love must be described by recalling how love
makes blind. The individual becomes as though blind, you can almost see it in
him, he sinks into himself, looks in upon his own looking, and yet there is a
constant striving to look out upon the world. Though the world has blinded him,
he still stares out at it. It is this dreaming yet searching state that Mozart has
depicted in the Page in Figaro, as sensual as it is of the soul. In contrast, the first
love is an absolute wakefulness, an absolute watchfulness, and this has to be
kept going not to do it injustice. It is directed at a single, definite, actual object
which is all there is for it; everything else just does not exist. This one object
exists not in vague outline, but as a definite living being. This first love has an
element of the sensual, of beauty, in it, yet it is not simply sensual. The sensual
as such comes forth first in reflection, but first love lacks reflection and is
therefore not simply sensual. This is the necessity in first love. As with
everything eternal, it has in itself the twofold character of presupposing itself
back into all eternity and forward into all eternity. […]
[First love] is the unity of freedom and necessity. The individual feels drawn to
the other with an irresistible power but precisely in this feels his freedom. It is a
unity of the universal and the singular, it has the universal as the singular, even
to the verge of the contingent. But it is not on the strength of reflection that it has
all this, it has it immediately. The more definitively first love conforms to this,
the healthier it is, the more likely that it is indeed a first love. The two are drawn
to one another by an irresistible power and yet they enjoy in this their whole
freedom. I have no hard-hearted fathers on hand here, no sphinxes to be dealt
with first,
11
I have fortune enough with which to equip them (nor have I taken it
on myself, as novelist and playwright, to drag out time to the torment of the
whole world, of the lovers, of readers and audience), so in the name of God let
them come together. You see I offer you the noble father and actually it is really
a very attractive role if only we ourselves had not often made it so laughable.
You noted perhaps that, in the father’s style, I added the little phrase, ‘in the
name of God’. This you can surely forgive in an old man who may never have
known what first love is or has long since forgotten; but that a younger man still
enthused over first love lets himself make a point of it, may surprise you. […]
So first love is immediately secure in itself. But the individuals have also had a
religious development. This I have a right to assume, and indeed I shall, seeing I
am to show that first love and marriage can survive together. It is of course
another matter when an unhappy first love teaches the individuals to seek
security in God and marriage. Then the first love is changed even if it may still
be possible to restore it. […] Here it is not in time of sorrow that they seek God,
nor is it fear and dread that impel them to pray. Their heart, their whole being, is
filled with joy; what more natural than to thank Him for this? There is nothing
they fear: outside dangers will have no power over them, and inward dangers,
yes, those are quite unknown to first love. But this thanksgiving does not alter
first love; it has not been joined by any disturbing reflection, it is assumed into a
higher concentricity. But a thanksgiving of this kind, like all prayer, is combined
with an element of action, not in an external but an internal sense, in this case to
want to hold on to this first love. This doesn’t change the nature of the first love,
no reflection has joined in, its firm-jointedness is not loosened, it still retains its
blessed assurance intact, it is simply assumed into a higher concentricity.
Perhaps in this higher concentricity it simply does not know what it has to fear,
perhaps it imagines no dangers, and yet through this good intention, which also
is a kind of first love, it is lifted up into the ethical. […]
You will of course remind me that I left it quite unclear and vague which God I
was referring to, that it was not a heathen Eros who would gladly be privy to
love’s secrets, and whose presence was then at bottom merely a reflection of the
lovers’ own mood, but the Christian God, the God of spirit who is jealous in His
opposition to everything that is not spirit. You would remind me that in
Christianity beauty and the sensual are negated, you would remark in passing
that for the Christian it is indifferent whether Christ was ugly or beautiful; you
would beg me to keep away from love’s secret meetings with my orthodoxy and
in particular from any attempt at mediation, which you oppose even more than
the most crass orthodoxy: ‘Yes, how cheering for the young girl, how totally in
harmony with her mood, to step up to the altar. As for the congregation, it must
surely see in her an imperfect being who has been unable to resist the seduction
of earthly desire; she is to stand there as though to be chastised or make a public
confession; and the priest first reads the text and then perhaps leans over the rail
to confide to her, as a small crumb of comfort, that matrimony is, after all, an
estate well pleasing to God. All that’s worthwhile here is the priest’s position,
and if the girl were sweet and young I wouldn’t mind being in it so I could
whisper this secret in her ear.’
My young friend! Yes, matrimony is indeed an estate well pleasing to God: on
the other hand I know of no place in the Scriptures which speaks of a special
blessing for bachelors – which is after all where all your multifarious love affairs
end. But dealing with you is just about the hardest of tasks, for you are capable
of proving anything and in your hands every phenomenon can become anything.
Yes, certainly, the Christian God is spirit and Christianity is spirit, and a discord
is posited between flesh and spirit; but flesh is not sensuality, it is selfishness,
and in this sense even the spiritual can be sensual; if for example someone takes
his spiritual gifts in vain, then he is carnal. And well I know that for the
Christian it is not necessary that Christ should have been an earthly beauty, and
if it were, it would be very sad for a different reason from the one you proffer,
for if beauty were essential think how the believer would have to yearn to see
him. But from all this it in no way follows that the sensual is annihilated in
Christianity. First love has in it the element of beauty, and the joy and fullness to
be found in the sensual when it is innocent can very well be taken up into
Christianity. […]
So you have found what your soul was yearning for, what in many mistaken
attempts it thought it would find; you have found a girl in whom your whole
being finds its repose; and even if one might think you a little too experienced,
this then is nevertheless your first love, of that you are convinced. ‘She’s pretty’
– naturally; ‘sweet’ – what else? ‘and yet her beauty lies not in the normal, but in
the unity of the manifold, in the accidental, the self-contradictory’; ‘she has a
soul’ – I can imagine; ‘she can abandon herself to an impression so that it can
practically make your head swim; she is light, she can bob like a bird on a twig,
she has spirit, spirit enough to illuminate her beauty but not more’. The day has
come that is to assure you of the possession of all you own in the world – a
possession which for that matter you are certain enough of. You have requested
the favour of imparting extreme unction upon her. You have already waited some
time in the family dining-room; several times a bustling chambermaid, four or
five inquisitive cousins, a venerable aunt, a hairdresser, have hurried past. You
are already half indignant at all this. Then the door to the parlour slowly opens,
you take a quick look inside, you are delighted there is not a soul there, that she
has had the tact to remove all intruders even from the parlour. She is pretty,
prettier than ever, there is an animation about her, a harmony whose vibrations
resonate even through her. You are astonished; she exceeds even your dreams;
you too are transformed but your subtle reflection instantly conceals your
emotion; your calm has a still more seductive effect upon her, imparts a desire in
her soul which gives interest to her beauty. You approach her. Her finery, too,
gives the situation a touch of the uncommon. You still haven’t uttered a word.
You look at her, yet as though you were not looking, you do not wish to
embarrass her with amorous boorishness, but even the mirror comes to your aid.
Upon her bosom you fasten a brooch you gave her the first time you kissed her,
with a passion which now seeks its confirmation; she has herself kept it hidden,
no one has known about it. You produce a little bouquet of flowers of just one
sort, a flower of no significance in itself. When you sent her flowers there was
always a small shoot of it, but not noticeable, so no one suspected it but her.
Today this flower too shall stand up in honour and dignity, it alone is to adorn
her, for she loved it. You hand it to her, a tear trembles in her eye, she returns it
to you, you kiss it and fasten it to her bosom. A certain sorrow spreads over her.
You yourself are moved. She takes a step back, she looks half in anger at the
finery that is getting in her way, she throws her arms about your neck, she cannot
tear herself away, she embraces you as vehemently as though an enemy power
would tear you from her. Her delicate finery is crushed, her hair has fallen down,
in the same instant she has vanished. You are left once more to your solitude,
which is broken only by a bustling chambermaid, four or five inquisitive
cousins, a venerable aunt, a hairdresser. Then the parlour door opens, she enters,
and a quiet earnestness is to be read in her every feature. You press her hand,
leave her only to meet her again – yes, at the Lord’s altar; you had forgotten that,
you who had pondered so much at other times on that too. You forgot it in your
infatuation. You had come to terms with the situation as it is for everyone else,
but this you had not considered; and yet you have come too far not to see that a
marriage is rather more than a ceremony. You are seized by a fear: ‘This girl
whose soul is as pure as the light of day, sublime as the vault of heaven, innocent
as the ocean, this girl before whom I could fall down in worship, whose love I
feel could snatch me out of all confusion and give me new birth, it is she I am to
lead to the Lord’s altar, she who is to stand there like a sinner, of whom and to
whom it shall be said that it was Eve who seduced Adam. To her before whom
my proud soul bows down, the only one to whom it has bowed down, to her it
shall be said that I am to be her master and she subservient to her husband. The
moment has come, the Church is already reaching out its arms for her and before
giving her back to me it will first press a bridal kiss upon her lips, not that bridal
kiss I gave the whole world for; it is already reaching out its arms to embrace
her, but this embrace will cause all her beauty to fade, and then it will toss her
over to me and say, “Be fruitful and multiply”. What kind of power is it that
dares intrude between me and my bride, the bride I myself have chosen and who
has chosen me? And this power would command her to be true to me; does she
then need to be so commanded? And is she to be true to me only because a third
party commands it, one whom she therefore loves more than me? And it bids me
be true to her; must I be bidden to be that, I who belong to her with all my soul?
And this power decides our relation to each other; it says I am to ask and she is
to obey; but suppose I do not want to ask, suppose I feel myself too inferior for
that? No, I will obey her, her hint is my command, but I will not submit to a
foreign power. No, I will flee with her afar while there is still time, and I will beg
the night to hide us and the silent clouds to tell us fairy-tales in bold images, as
befits a wedding night, and under the immense vault of heaven I will intoxicate
myself in her physical charms, alone with her, alone in the whole world, and I
will throw myself into the abyss of her love; and my lips are mute, for the clouds
are my thoughts and my thoughts are clouds; and I will cry out and implore all
the powers of heaven and earth that nothing may disturb my happiness, and I
will bind them on oath and let them swear to this. Yes, away, far away, that my
soul might be restored to health, that my breast might breathe again, that I shall
not stifle in this sickly air – away.’ – Yes, away, that is what I would say too:
Procul o, procul este, profani.
12 But have you also considered whether she will
follow you on this expedition? ‘Woman is weak’, no, she is meek, she is much
nearer to God than man is. That is why, for her, love is everything, and she will
certainly not disdain the blessing and the confirmation which God would grant
her. It has certainly never occurred to a woman to have anything against
marriage, and in all eternity it never will, so long as men themselves do not
corrupt her, for an emancipated woman might well light upon such a thing.
Offence always comes from men; for man is proud, he wants to be everything,
he will have nothing above him. […]
The first thing that scandalized you was that you should be solemnly instated
as her master. As if that is not what you were and perhaps all too much so, as
though your words did not carry that stamp sufficiently. But you will not give up
this idolatry, this coquetry, about wanting to be her slave though you sense very
well that you are her master.
Second, what made your soul rebel was that your beloved should be declared a
sinner. You are an aesthete, and I might be tempted to propose it to your idle
head’s consideration whether this could not make a woman even more beautiful.
[…] You can well understand I am not serious in this […] [but] there would be
plenty for you to busy yourself with in this respect. You would have thought of
the tremulous light which even in the Gospel spreads over the woman that was a
sinner, whose many sins were forgiven because she loved much.
13 What I would
say, however, is that, once again, it is just a whim of yours to have her stand
there as a sinner. For it is one thing to sin in abstracto, another to know it in
concrete. But woman is meek and certainly it has never occurred to a woman to
be truly offended at the earnest word of the Church being addressed to her.
Woman is meek and full of trust. Who can cast her eyes down like a woman, but
who like her can lift them up? So if the Church’s solemn proclamation that sin
has come into the world should bring about any change in her, it would have to
be that she held fast still more strongly to her love. […]
Finally, it upsets you that a third power wants to bind you to being true to her
and her to you. For the record, I must ask you to recall that this third power does
not impose itself; since the individuals we have in mind are religiously
developed, they themselves seek it out, and the question is whether anything in it
stands in the way of their first love. You will hardly deny that it is natural for
first love to seek corroboration through love being made, in one way or another,
into a duty the lovers impose upon themselves in the face of a higher power.
Lovers swear fidelity to one another by the moon, the stars, the ashes of their
fathers, their honour, etc. If to this you say: ‘Yes, such oaths wouldn’t mean
anything, they’re just a reflection of the lovers’ own mood, why otherwise
should it occur to them to swear by the moon?’, I reply that here you yourself
have changed the nature of first love; for the beauty of first love is precisely that
everything acquired reality for it on the strength of love, and only in the moment
of reflection is it clear that swearing to the moon is meaningless […]
We saw, then, how first love could come into relation with the ethical and the
religious without the aid of a reflection that changed its nature, since it is simply
drawn up into a higher immediate concentricity. In one sense a change has
indeed occurred, and it is this I shall now consider, what could be called the
lovers’ metamorphosis into bride and bridegroom. The way the lovers refer their
love to God is by thanking God for it. Here the change is one of refinement. The
weakness to which the man is most prone is to suppose he has conquered the girl
he loves; this makes him feel superior – but there is nothing at all aesthetic in
that. When he thanks God, on the other hand, he humbles himself under his love,
and it is in truth far more beautiful to take the beloved as a gift from the hand of
God than to have subdued the whole world to conquer her. Add to this that a
man really in love will not find rest in his soul until he has thus humbled himself
before God; and the girl he loves really means far too much for him to dare take
her even in the most refined sense as a prize. And should it please him to
conquer and take possession of her, he will realize that the proper thing is daily
possession throughout a whole lifetime, not the preternatural power of brief
infatuation. Yet this does not occur as though consequent upon some previous
doubt, it happens immediately. Thus what is really living in first love remains,
while the bitter elements, if I may so put it, are filtered out. It is natural for the
other sex to be sensible of the imbalance and submit to it, and if she goes so far
as to feel joy and happiness in being nothing, that might well be on the way to
becoming something untrue, but if she now thanks God for the loved one, her
soul is safe against suffering; being able to thank God means she can put the
loved one at just enough distance for her to be able to draw breath. And that
occurs not as a result of an anxious doubt. She knows no such thing. It happens
immediately.
I have already indicated above that even the illusory eternity in first love made
it moral. In now referring their love to God, this thanks which the lovers give for
their love will itself give it an absolute stamp of eternity, as also will the
intention and the obligation, and this eternity will be based not upon dark forces
but upon the eternal itself. The intention is significant in another way too. In it
lies the possibility of movement in the love, and so also the possibility of its
being freed of the difficulty under which first love as such labours, that it cannot
get started. The aesthetic in it lies in its infinitude, but its unaesthetic aspect lies
in the fact that this infinitude can be finitized. I shall use a more figurative
expression to throw light on how the advent of the religious cannot disturb the
first love. The religious is really the expression of the conviction that with God’s
help man is lighter than the whole world, the same faith that lies behind man’s
ability to swim. Now assuming there is a swimming belt that can hold one up,
we might suppose it would always be worn by someone who had been in mortal
danger, but we might also suppose that a person who had never been in mortal
danger would wear it too. The latter corresponds to the relation between first
love and the religious. First love girdles itself with the religious without any
previous painful experience or anxious reflection. Only do not, I pray, press the
analogy too far, as if the religious only stood in an external relation to first love.
That this is not the case has been shown above.
And let us settle accounts once and for all. You talk so much of the erotic
embrace, but what is it compared with the matrimonial! What greater richness of
modulation in the matrimonial ‘we’ than in the erotic! It resonates neither with
the merely momentary eternity of seduction, nor with the illusory eternity of
fantasy and imagination, but with the eternity of consciousness, the eternal’s
eternity. What strength in the matrimonial ‘my’, for will, resolve and intention
sound a note of far greater depth. What energy and resilience, for what so hard as
will and what so soft! What power of movement! – not the merely confused
enthusiasm of dark incitement, for marriage is made in heaven and duty
permeates the whole body of the universe to its furthest extremity; it prepares the
way and assures us that in all eternity no obstacle is able to disturb the love! So
let Don Juan keep his leafy bower, the knight the dark heaven and its stars if he
cannot see above it; marriage has its heaven even higher. Such is marriage; and
when it is not so, God is not to blame, nor Christianity, nor the wedding, nor a
curse or a blessing, but man alone. And is it not a pity and a shame that books
are written which confuse people about life, make them bored with it before they
begin, instead of teaching them how to live? If they were right, that would be a
painful truth, but it is lies. We are taught to sin, and those who haven’t the heart
for that are made just as unhappy in another way. I myself, alas, am all too
affected by the aesthetic not to know diat the word ‘husband’ grates on your ear.
But I do not care. Even if the word ‘husband’ has come into disrepute and is now
almost a laughing matter, it is high time one tried to restore it to its place of
honour. And if you say, ‘You never see anything like that even though you see
marriages often enough’, that does not disturb me; for seeing marriage every day
makes one see the greatness in it less often, not least when one does everything
to belittle it. For have you not brought it to such a pass diat a girl who offers a
man her hand before the altar is thought more imperfect dian those heroines in
your romances with their first love?
Now that I have listened patiendy to you and your outbursts, more angry
perhaps dian you would righdy admit (but when you confront marriage as a
reality you will perhaps see that you have not quite understood these agitations
inside you – you will rage inwardly yet presumably again without confiding in
anyone), then you may forgive me my small observations. One loves only once
in one’s life, the heart holds on to its first love – marriage! Hearken to and
wonder at this harmony of the different spheres. It is the same thing, just
expressed aesthetically, religiously and ethically. One loves only once. To help
make this a reality marriage steps in, and if people who do not love one another
take it into their heads to get married, then the Church cannot be held
responsible. One loves but once, this echoes from the most divergent quarters:
from the fortunate to whom each day brings happy proof of the fact, and from
the unhappy, of whom there are really only two classes, those continually
yearning for the ideal and those not willing to hold on to it. The latter are the real
seducers. You meet them less often because there is always something special
about them. I knew one, yet he too admitted that one loves only once, but love
had been unable to tame his wild lust. ‘Yes,’ say certain people, ‘one loves only
once, one marries twice, three times.’ Here again the spheres are united; for the
aesthetic says no and the Church and clerical ethics look with suspicion on the
second marriage. This for me is of the utmost importance; for if it were true that
man loved several times, then marriage would come into question; it might look
as though the erotic was being injured by an arbitrary rule of religion requiring
one to love only once, treating matters of the erotic so carelessly in this way. As
if to say, ‘You can marry once and let that be an end of it.’
We have now seen how first love came into relation with marriage without
being changed. That same aesthetic which is to be found in the first love must
therefore also be found in the marriage, since the former is contained in the
latter. But the aesthetic aspect of first love lies in its infinitude, its apriority – as
explained above. Next, it h’es in the unity of opposites which love is: love is
sensual yet spiritual; it is freedom yet necessity; it is in the instant, has to a high
degree the quality of presence, and yet has an eternity in itself. All this marriage
has too: it is sensual yet spiritual, but it is more, for applying the word ‘spiritual’
to first love amounts to saying it is of the soul, that it is sensuality permeated
with spirit. It is freedom and necessity, but also more, for freedom in the case of
first love is really rather the freedom of the soul in which individuality has not
yet expurgated itself of natural necessity. But the more freedom, the more selfsurrender, and only a self-possessed person can be lavish with himself. The
religious freed the individuals – he from false pride, she from false humility, and
it thrust itself between the lovers who held each other in such a close embrace,
not to separate them but so that she could give of herself with an abundance she
had never before suspected, and he not simply receive but give of himself to be
received by her. It has in it an inner infinitude even more than first love, for
marriage’s inner infinitude is an eternal life. It is a unity of opposites even more
than first love, for it has one opposition more, the spiritual and thereby the
sensual in a yet deeper opposition; but the further from the sensual one gets the
greater aesthetic significance it acquires, for otherwise the most aesthetic thing
would be animal instinct. But in marriage the spiritual is higher than in first love,
and the higher the heaven over the marriage bed the better, the more beautiful,
the more aesthetical it is, and the heaven that overarches the marriage is not this
earthly one but the heaven of the spirit. […]
Yes, I confess, it may be wrong of me, but often when I think of my own
marriage, the thought awakens an inexplicable sadness within me; that it will
come to an end, that certain as I am that I shall live in another life with her to
whom my marriage united me, she will be given to me there in another way, that
the opposition which was one of the conditions of our love will be transcended.
Yet it consoles me that I know, that I shall recall, that with her I have lived in the
most heartfelt, the most beautiful fellowship that earthly life affords. For if I
understand anything of all this, then earthly love’s defect is the same as its
advantage, that it is preferential love. Spiritual love shows no partiality and goes
in the opposite direction, constantly discharging all relativities. In its true form
earthly love takes the opposite path and at its best is only love for one single
person in the whole world. Herein lies the truth in having to love only one and
love only once. Earthly love begins by loving several – the preliminary
anticipations – and ends in loving one. Spiritual love opens itself constantly
wider, loves more and more, has its truth in loving all. So marriage is sensual but
spiritual at the same time, free and also necessary, absolute in itself and also,
within itself, pointing beyond itself.
Because it has this inner harmony, marriage naturally has its teleology in itself;
it is, in so far as it constantly presupposes itself, and in this respect any question
of its ‘why’ is a misunderstanding. […] I would stress the beauty in those
marriages which have as little ‘why’ as possible. The less ‘why’ the more love,
that is, when one sees what is true in it. For the frivolous there will of course
prove to have been a little ‘why’ in retrospect; for the serious person there will
prove, to his joy, to have been a huge ‘why’. The less ‘why’ the better. In the
lower classes marriage is usually entered upon without any great ‘why’, but that
is why these marriages resound far less frequently with so many ‘hows’ – how to
make ends meet, how to provide for the children, etc. For marriage there is only
marriage’s own ‘why’, but that is infinite and so it is not a ‘why’ according to the
sense I am taking it in here. […] The true ‘why’ is only one but at the same time
has in it an infinite energy and strength which can stifle all ‘hows’. The finite
‘why’ is a totality, a swarm, from which each takes his own, one more, the other
less, all as bad as each other. For even if someone could unite all finite ‘whys’ at
the beginning of his marriage, he would be the basest of husbands just for that
reason.
One of the seemingly most reputable answers to the ‘why’ of marriage is that
marriage is a school for character; one marries in order to elevate and improve
one’s character. I shall stick to an actual occurrence which I owe to you. There
was a government official you had ‘got hold of, as you put it, and that’s just like
you, for when something becomes an object for your observation you shrink
from nothing, you think you are following your vocation. He was, besides, quite
a clever fellow and had a particularly good knowledge of languages. The family
was gathered round the tea-table. He was smoking his pipe. His wife was no
beauty, looked rather simple, and old compared with him, all of which could
promptly lead one to suppose, as you remarked, that there must be some very
special ‘why’. At the table sat a young, rather pale, newly-wed woman, who
looked as though she knew another ‘why’. The wife herself poured tea. It was
passed round by a young girl of sixteen, not pretty but plump and lively – she
appeared not yet to have arrived at any ‘why’. In that honourable company your
unworthiness had also found a place. You, who were present ex officio, who had
already on a number of occasions come there in vain, naturally found the
situation far too favourable to let it slip. There had been talk at the time of a
broken engagement. The family had not yet heard this important piece of local
news. The case was pleaded from all sides, that is to say, everyone was
prosecutor; it was submitted to judgement and the sinner excommunicated.
Feelings ran high. You ventured to put in a little word in the condemned man’s
favour, which naturally wasn’t intended to be to his advantage but to act as a
cue. It didn’t succeed, so you continued, ‘Maybe the whole engagement was too
hasty, maybe he failed to account for the important “why” – one might almost
say the “but” – which should precede so decisive a step, – enfin why does one
marry, why, why?’ Each of these ‘whys’ was uttered with its distinctive but
equally doubting inflection. That was too much. One ‘why’ would already have
been enough, but such a comprehensive roll-call, a general call to arms in the
enemy’s camp, was decisive. The moment had come. With an air of good
humour that also bore the stamp of a prevailing common sense, the host said,
‘Yes of course, my good man, I can tell you, one marries because marriage is a
good school for character.’ Now the whole thing was in motion. Partly by
opposing, partly by approving, you got him to surpass himself in absurdity –
scarcely to the edification of his wife, to the scandal of the young married
woman, and to the astonishment of the young girl. Then I reproached you for
your behaviour, not for the host’s sake but for the women, for whom you were
malicious enough to make the scene as trying and protracted as possible. Two of
the womenfolk do not need my defence, and it was also only your customary
coquetry which led you not to avert your eyes from them. But his wife, perhaps
she really loved him, in which case think how dreadful it must have been for her
to listen to this. Also there was something indecent in the whole situation; far
from making marriage moral, common-sense reflection really makes it immoral.
Sensual love has only one transfiguration in which it is equally aesthetic,
religious and ethical, and that is love; common-sense calculation makes it just as
anaesthetic as irreligious, because the sensual here is not within its immediate
rights. So the man who marries for this or that reason takes a step as unaesthetic
as it is irreligious. The goodness of his purpose helps not at all, for the fault is
precisely that he has a purpose. Were a woman to marry so as – yes, one has
heard of such madness, a madness that appears to give her marriage an immense
‘why’ – so as to bear a saviour to the world, that marriage would be just as
unaesthetic as immoral and irreligious. It’s something one cannot make clear
often enough. A certain class of common-sense persons look down with
enormous contempt on the aesthetic as vanity and childishness, and in their
pitiable teleology they imagine they are raised high above such things. But it is
the exact opposite: with their common sense such people are as unethical as they
are unaesthetic. So one always does best to look to the other sex, which is both
the more rehgious and the more aesthetic. The host’s exposition was in any case
rather trivial and I do not need to present it. On the other hand, I will conclude
these remarks by wishing every such husband a Xanthippe for his wife and as
wicked children as possible, so that he can hope to possess the means for
attaining his purpose.
The fact that, apart from this, marriage really is a school for character or, to
avoid using so philistine an expression, a genesis of character, is something I
gladly admit; though naturally I must constantly hold that anyone who marries
for that reason should rather be directed to any other school at all than to that of
love. Besides, someone like that will never derive any benefit from attending
that school. In the first place, he deprives himself of the strength, the
consolidation, the shiver running through all one’s thoughts and limbs which is
what a marriage is, for it is indeed an act of daring; but that is what it should be,
and far from its being correct to want to calculate, such a calculation is precisely
an attempt to enervate it. Second, he has of course let go the great working
capital of love and the humility which the religious element in marriage gives.
Naturally he is much too super-shrewd not to bring with him a pat conception of
how he wants his development to go; this will then be the guideline for his
marriage and for the unfortunate being he has been shameless enough to select
as his sampler. […]
Or one marries – to have children, to make one’s humble contribution to the
propagation of the human race upon earth. Imagine he gets no children; then his
contribution will be very meagre. True, States have taken it upon themselves to
invest marriage with this purpose, giving out rewards for those who marry and
for those with most male children. At times Christianity has done the opposite by
giving out rewards for those who avoid marriage. Even if this was a
misunderstanding, at least it shows a deep respect for the person, that to this
extent the individual is not to be treated as merely an element, but as definitive.
The more abstractly the State is conceived, and the less it champions
individuality, the more natural such an injunction and such an encouragement
become. By contrast, in our own time childless marriage has occasionally been
almost extolled. For our age finds it hard enough to summon the resignation
needed to enter a marriage; having performed that amount of self-denial, one
thinks that that must be enough and one cannot really put up with such
extravagances as a flock of children. In novels one often finds, if only idly in a
casual aside, but still proffered as a reason for a particular individual’s not
marrying, the fact that he cannot abide children; in real life one sees this
manifested in the most refined countries in the removal of children at the earliest
opportunity from their parents’ home, their being placed in boarding-schools,
etc. How often have you not amused yourself at the expense of these tragi-comic
heads of family with four blessed children who in all secrecy they wished far
away! How often have you not regaled yourself with the injury done to the
superiority of those heads of family by the pettiness life brings with it, when the
children have to be spanked, when they spill things, when they scream, when the
great man – the father – feels his dauntlessness obstructed by the thought that his
children bind him to the earth. How often have you not, with well-deserved
cruelty, brought such a father to the highest pitch of suppressed rage when you
occupied yourself exclusively with his children, letting fall a few words about
what a blessing it is, after all, to have children.
Marrying in order to contribute to the propagation of the race might seem an
extremely objective reason and a highly natural one. It is as though one took
God’s point of view and saw from there the beauty of maintaining the race.
Indeed, one might attach a special importance to the saying ‘Increase and
multiply and replenish the earth’. And yet such a marriage is as unnatural as it is
arbitrary and has no support in the Holy Scriptures. For we read that God
established marriage because it was ‘not good that man should be alone’, to
make a companion for him.
14 And if to some mocker of religion there might
seem something slightly questionable about this companionship which begins
with man being cast into perdition, that proves nothing and I would rather appeal
to that event as a motto for all marriages; for only after the woman had brought
this about was the heartfelt fellowship established between them. Then we also
read, ‘and He blessed them’.
15 These words are completely overlooked. And
when the Apostle Paul in some place exhorts the woman to ‘learn in silence with
all subjection’ and ‘to be in silence’, and then, having silenced her, to humiliate
her even further, adds, ‘she shall be saved in childbearing’, I would never have
forgiven the Apostle this contempt had he not made up for it all by adding, ‘if
they continue in faith and charity, and holiness, with sobriety’.
16
[…]
But back to […] those married people indefatigably bent on propagating the
race. A marriage of this sort usually covers itself in a more aesthetic wrapping. A
noble old family of distinction is about to die out; only two representatives
remain, a grandfather and his grandson. It is the venerable old man’s only wish
that the grandson marry so that the family should not become extinct. Or a man
who is of no great importance in his own life thinks back, if not so very far then
at least to his parents, whom he has loved so much that he would rather their
name should not die out but be preserved in the grateful memories of the living.
Perhaps he has some vague idea of how fine it would be to be able to tell the
children of their grandfather, long since dead, and let this ideal picture, which is
just a memory, give strength to their lives and inspire them to all that is noble
and great. Maybe he thinks he can in this way repay some of the debt he feels he
owes to his parents. That is all very nice and beautiful but irrelevant to marriage,
and a marriage entered into for this reason alone is as unaesthetic as it is
unethical. That may sound harsh but it is true. Marriage can only be undertaken
with one purpose which makes it ethical and aesthetic in the same degree, but
that purpose is immanent; every other purpose separates what belongs together
and in doing so turns both the spiritual and the sensual into fmitudes. Someone
may win a girl’s heart by talking in this way, particularly if the sentiments
expressed are to some extent genuine, but it is wrong and the fact alters her very
being, and it is always an insult to a girl to want to marry her for any other
reason than that one loves her.
Although all (to use one of your own expressions) stud-farm purposes are as
such irrelevant for marriage, a person who has not become confused about his
relationship will find a blessing in the family descent. It is a beautiful thing, after
all, for the one person to owe the other as much as possible, but the highest
thing, surely, one person can owe another is – life! And yet a child can owe a
father even more, for it does not receive life bare and blank, it receives it with a
definite content, and when the child has rested long enough at the mother’s
breast it is laid at the father’s, and he too nourishes it with his flesh and blood,
with a stormy life’s dearly bought experience. And, after all, what possibility
there is in a child! I am ready to agree with you in hating all the idolatry
practised with children, especially the whole cult of the family and the
circulating of children at the dinner-table and supper-table for the family kiss,
family adulation and family expectations, while the parents complacently
congratulate one another on the troubles they have survived and rejoice in the
product of their art. Yes, I admit I can be almost as sarcastic at such tiresome
practices as you. But I do not allow myself to be disturbed further by them.
Children belong to the innermost and most private life of the family, and it is to
this twilight zone of mysteries one ought to direct every serious or God-fearing
thought on the matter. But there every child will also be shown to have a halo
round its head, and every father will feel there that there is more in the child than
it owes to him, indeed with humility he will feel that the child is a trust and that
he is in the finest sense of the word its stepfather. […]
As for you, indeed you love possibility, yet the thought of children certainly
will not make you glad, for I have no doubt this, too, is a world your inquisitive
and vagabond mind has peeped into. That, of course, is because you want to
have possibility under your own control. You are very fond of being in the same
state children are in when they wait in the darkened room for the Christmas tree
to appear. But a child, to be sure, is a possibility of quite another kind, and of so
serious a kind that you would hardly have the patience to put up with it. And yet
children are a blessing. It is a fine and good thing for someone to think with deep
seriousness of what is best for his children, but if he does not at least sometimes
remember that it is not just a duty that is imposed upon him, a responsibility, but
also a blessing, and that God in heaven has not forgotten what even human
beings never forget, to lay a gift on the cradle, then he has not opened his heart,
either to aesthetic or to religious feelings. […]
I have seen a poor woman who carried on a small trade, not in a shop or stall –
she stood in the open square, she stood there in the rain and wind with a baby in
her arms; she herself was clean and tidy and the baby carefully wrapped. I have
seen her many times. A fashionable lady came by who practically told her off for
not leaving the child at home – all the more so because it got in her way. And a
priest passing in the same direction approached her; he wanted to find a place for
the child in an institution. She thanked him kindly, but you should have seen the
look with which she glanced down at the child. Had the child been frozen, that
look would have thawed it; had it been dead and cold, that look would have
called it back to life; had it been famished and parched, that look’s blessing
would have restored it. But the child slept and not even its smile could reward
the mother. See how this woman perceived what a blessing a child is! If I were a
painter I would never paint anything but this woman. Such a sight is a rarity, like
a rare flower which one gets to see only by a lucky chance. But the world of
spirit is not subject to vainglory; if one finds the tree it blooms perpetually. Her I
have often seen. I showed her to my wife. I did not affect importance, sent no
rich gifts as though I had a divine authority to reward; I humbled myself beneath
her, in truth she needs neither gold nor fashionable ladies, or institutions and
priests, or a poor judge in civil law and his wife. She needs absolutely nothing
except that the child will one day love her with the same tenderness, and she
wants not even for that, it is the reward she has deserved, a blessing which
heaven will not withhold. […]
But children are a blessing also in another sense, for one learns so
indescribably much from them. I have seen proud people whom hitherto no fate
had humbled, who snatched the girl they loved from out of the family life where
she belonged with such assurance that it was as if to say, ‘When you have me,
that should be enough, I’m used to defying storms, how much more so now
when I have the thought of you to give me heart, now that I have much more to
fight for.’ I have seen the same men as fathers; a small mishap that befell their
children could humble them, a sickness bring prayer to their proud lips. I have
seen people who prided themselves for practically despising the God that is in
heaven, who were wont to pick on every believer as a target of scorn – I have
seen them as fathers take the most pious people into service for the good of their
children. I have seen girls whose proud glance brought Olympus to tremble, girls
whose vain minds lived only for pomp and finery – I have seen them as mothers
endure every humiliation, practically begging like mendicants for what they
thought was to their children’s advantage. […]
In another way, too, one learns much from children. In every child there is
something original upon which all abstract principles and maxims come more or
less to grief. One has to begin from the beginning, often with much trial and
tribulation. There is a deep significance in the Chinese saying: ‘Bring your
children up well, and you will come to know what you owe your parents.’ And
now, the responsibility that rests on the father. One consorts with other people,
one tries to convey to them some idea of what one thinks right, perhaps makes
several attempts; when it does not help, one stops having anything to do with
them, one washes one’s hands. But when does the moment come when a father
dares, or rather when a father-heart can resolve, to give up any further attempt?
The whole of life is lived again in the children; only then does one come to some
understanding of one’s own life. However, it is really no use talking to you about
all this; there are things about which one can never form a living conception if
one has not experienced them, among them being a father.
And now finally, the fine way in which one is connected by means of one’s
children to a future and a past. Although one may not exactly have fourteen
distinguished ancestors and a concern for producing the fifteenth in line, one has
in fact a far longer genealogy, and indeed it gladdens the heart to see how the
race takes on as it were a distinct pattern. The unmarried man, too, can of course
make such observations, but he will not to the same degree feel prompted to do
so, nor entitled, since to some extent they are the interventions of an intruder.
Or one marries to acquire a home. One was bored at home, one has travelled
abroad and was bored, one has returned home and was bored. For the sake of
company one keeps a remarkably fine retriever and a thoroughbred mare, but
one feels that something is missing. For some time one has been vainly seeking
an acquaintance at the restaurant where one meets some like-minded friends.
One learns he has married, one becomes soft-hearted, sentimental about one’s
old age; one feels that everything around one is so empty, no one is waiting for
you when you are away. The old housekeeper is basically a very decent woman
but she has no idea at all how to cheer one up, how to make things a little
comfortable. One marries. The neighbourhood claps its hands, finds that one has
acted wisely and sensibly, and then they go on to discuss the most important
factor in housekeeping, the supreme earthly good: a well-behaved and reliable
cook who can be trusted to go to the market alone, a nimble-fingered
chambermaid who is so capable that she can be used for anything. If only a baldheaded old hypocrite like this were content to marry a night-nurse – but usually
that is not the case. The best is not good enough, and finally he succeeds in
capturing a pretty young girl who is then fashioned into a galley-slave of this
kind. Perhaps she has never loved; what a frightful misunderstanding!
You see, I have been giving you the floor. However, you must admit that,
particularly among more common folk, one finds marriages entered into for the
purpose of acquiring a home which have a rather pleasing effect. These are for
men of younger years. Not having been especially buffeted by life, they have
accumulated the necessary income and now think of getting married. That is
agreeable. I also know it would never occur to you to direct your scorn on
marriages like these. A certain noble simplicity lends them a touch of both the
aesthetic and the religious. For there is nothing egoistic here in the thought of
wanting a home; on the contrary, the notion they attach to it is that of duty, a
vocation, which is laid upon them, but at the same time a duty that is dear to
them.
One all too often hears married folk console themselves and alarm the
unmarried by saying, ‘Yes, at least we have a home, and a place of refuge for
when we grow older.’ They sometimes add with a rare Sunday flourish in the
edifying style: ‘Our children and children’s children will one day close our eyes
and mourn for us.’ The fate of the unmarried will be the opposite. It is admitted
with a certain envy that for a while, in their younger days, these have the best of
it; one silently wishes that one was not yet married oneself. Yet it all comes
again: like the rich man,
17
the unmarried have taken their goods in advance.
All such marriages suffer from the defect that they treat one single factor in
marriage as the purpose of marriage, and therefore they often feel disappointed
(especially, of course, the first of the three) when they have to admit that a
marriage, after all, means rather more than the acquisition of a comfortable,
agreeable and convenient home. But now let us again abstract from the mistake
in order to see what is fine and true. It is not granted to everyone to extend his
activity so very widely, and many who imagine they are working for something
greater, sooner or later catch themselves in a delusion. I do not at all mean to
refer to you, for you of course are too clever not to get wind of this illusion at
once, and your scorn has been directed at it often enough. You have, in this
respect, an extraordinary degree of resignation and have shown once and for all a
total renunciation. You prefer to amuse yourself. You are everywhere a welcome
guest. Your wit, your ease in company, a certain good naturedness, likewise
maliciousness, all contribute to the sight of you conjuring up the thought of a
pleasant evening. You have always been, and always will be, a welcome guest in
my house, partly because I am not all that afraid of you, partly because it will be
some time before I have to begin being so: my only daughter is just three years
old, and you surely don’t start sending your messages that early. […] You talk so
sensibly, so knowledgeably, that anyone not knowing you better must believe
you are a settled man. However, you have by no means reached the truth. You
have come to a halt at the destroying of illusions, and since that is something you
have done in all possible and imaginable ways, really you have worked your way
into a new illusion: the illusion that one can come to a halt there. Yes, my friend,
you are living in an illusion and you accomplish nothing. […]
It is this thought, that it is a vocation, that must be associated, first of all, with
the idea of a home, so as to be rid of any untrue and contemptible thought of
ease. Even in the man’s pleasure there should be an element of this calling, even
if it is not manifested in any single, external tangible act. A man can be active in
this respect without its being seen, while the woman’s domestic activity is more
apparent. But the idea of a home is associated, secondly, with such a mass of
small considerations that it is very hard to say anything about them in general. In
this respect each house has its own distinctive character, and it could be of some
interest to acquaint oneself with a wide variety of these. Naturally, however, the
point is whether any such character is permeated with a certain spirit, and I for
my part abhor all that separatist nonsense in those families which, from the very
first, make a point of showing how special everything is in their house, and
which sometimes extends to the family’s speaking its own language, or in such
enigmatic allusions that one doesn’t know what to make of it. What matters is
that the family itself has such a distinctive character, the art is to contrive to
conceal it.
Those who marry in order to have a home are always complaining that they
have no one waiting for them, no one to welcome them, etc. This in itself shows
they really only have a home because they think also of an outside. Praise God I
have no need at all to be outside, either to remember or to forget that I have a
home. […]
What more I could wish to say to you in this matter I would rather say in
connection with a particular expression I think can justifiably be applied to you,
and one you yourself often use: that you are a ‘stranger and an alien’ in the
world. Young people who have no idea of the cost of experience – and no idea of
its unutterable wealth either – could easily let themselves be carried away in the
same swirl; your talk may perhaps affect them like a fresh breeze which lures
them out onto that infinite ocean you show them; even you yourself can be
youthfully intoxicated, almost out of control at the thought of this infinity, which
is your element, an element which, like the ocean, changeless, hides everything
on its deep floor. Should you not, already an experienced hand in these waters,
know how to tell of disaster and distress at sea? Of course, generally there is not
much one man knows about another on this sea. Here it is not a matter of large
ships that one fits out and launches only with difficulty upon the deep; no, it is a
question of very small boats, jolly-boats just for one person; one takes advantage
of the instant, one spreads one’s sail, one skims along with the infinite speed of
restless thoughts, alone on the infinite ocean, alone with the infinite heaven. This
life is full of danger, but one is familiar with the thought of losing it, for the real
enjoyment is to disappear into the infinite so far that all that is left is enough to
savour the disappearance. Seafarers relate how on the great world-ocean one
sees a kind of craft called the Flying Dutchman. It is able to spread a small sail
and then with infinite speed skim over the surface of the sea. That is pretty much
how it is with your voyage over the sea of life. Alone in one’s kayak one is
sufficient unto oneself, one has nothing to do with anybody except in the instant
one wants to. Alone in one’s kayak one is sufficient unto oneself – I cannot
rightly grasp how one is still able to fill this void, but as you are the only person
I have known of whom it can be said with some truth that you do fill it, I know
also that you have a person on board who can help you fill the time. You should
therefore say: alone in one’s boat, alone with one’s care, alone with one’s
despair, which one is craven enough to want rather to keep than submit to the
pain of being healed. […] I beg you reflect on the pain, the sadness, the
humiliation that lies in being in this sense a stranger and an alien in the world.
[…]
Think of the hidden life of [a] family when it is clothed in an outward form so
beautiful that the seams are nowhere visible, and reflect on your relation to it.
Just such a family would be to your taste. And you would perhaps often delight
in entering its circle. With your easy ways you would soon be as though intimate
with it. I say ‘as though’ since it is clear that you would not be that, clear that
because you will always be a stranger and an alien you never could. You would
be looked upon as a welcome guest, they might be kind enough to make
everything as agreeable for you as possible, they would be gracious towards you,
yes, they would treat you as one does a child one is fond of. As for you, you
would be inexhaustible in your attentions, inventive in delighting the family in
every way. Very pretty, don’t you think? And in one bizarre moment you might
be tempted to say that you didn’t care to see the family in dressing-gowns, or the
daughter in slippers, or the wife without her cap; and yet for you, if you look
more closely, there is a colossal humiliation implied by the family’s correct
behaviour towards you. Every family would have to behave towards you like
that, and you would be the one humiliated. Do you not think that the family
harbours within itself an entirely different life which is its shrine? Do you not
believe that all families still have their household gods even if they don’t place
them in the ante-room? And in that remark of yours does there not lie a very
refined weakness? For if ever you were to marry, I really do not believe that you
could bear to see your wife in a négligée, unless this were a decorative garment
designed to please you. You think no doubt that you have done much for the
family by entertaining them, by spreading over it a certain aesthetic lustre. But
suppose the family cared very little for this compared with the inner life it
possesses. That is how it will go for you with every family. And however proud
you may be, there is a humiliation in it. No one shares sorrow with you. No one
confides in you. You no doubt often think they do; certainly you have enriched
yourself with a multitude of psychological observations. But this is often a
deception; what people like is to talk to you only of this and that, and touch
distantly upon, or offer hints of, an anxiety only because the interest it arouses in
you eases their pain and already contains that agreeable quality which prompts
them to yearn for this medicine even when they don’t need it. And if someone
approached you just because of your isolated position (you know that people
would rather commune with a mendicant monk than with their father-confessor),
it would never acquire its true meaning, for you or for him. Not for him because
he would sense the arbitrariness in its being you he confided in; not for you
because you would be unable altogether to ignore the ambiguity your
competence rests on. […]
But now I return to what we were discussing above, to the finite purposes for
which people enter marriage. I have mentioned only three because, after all,
there did seem to be something to be said for them, seeing that they focus on one
or another single factor in marriage, regardless of the fact that in their
onesidedness they become as ridiculous as they are anaesthetic and irreligious. I
will forbear to mention a host of altogether despicable finite purposes, because
one cannot even laugh at them. As when one marries for money, or out of
jealousy, or because of the prospects – because there are prospects of her dying
soon, or of her living long but being a blessed branch that bears much fruit, so
that with her one can pocket the inheritances of a whole line of aunts and uncles.
I have no mind to mention all this sort of thing.
As an outcome of this inquiry I can emphasize here that what proved to be the
case was that marriage, in order to be aesthetic and religious, must have no
‘why’. But precisely this was what formed the aesthetic factor in first love, and
so here marriage stands once more on a level with first love. And the aesthetic in
marriage is this: that it conceals a multitude of ‘why’s’ which life reveals in all
their blessedness.
Since what I took it upon myself to prove in the first instance, however, was
the aesthetic validity of marriage, and since what set marriage apart from first
love was the ethical and religious element, but again, in so far as the ethical and
religious seeks expression in something particular, it finds that most essentially
in the marriage ceremony, it is upon this – so as not to appear to treat the matter
too lightly, so as not to be guilty of the least thing that could make it seem I was
concealing the schism between first love and marriage which you and many
others, if for different reasons, try to establish – it is upon this that I will now
dwell. […]
What […] does the wedding ceremony do? It offers, first of all, a survey of the
genesis of the human race, and thereby fastens the new marriage onto the great
body of the race. It offers thereby what is general, the purely human, calls it
forth in consciousness. This offends you; you may say, ‘It is disagreeable at the
moment of uniting oneself so tenderly with another person, so that everything
else disappears, to be reminded that es ist eine alte Geschichte,
18 something that
has been and is and will be.’ You want to rejoice in what is peculiar to your love,
you want to let all the passion of love blaze up in you, and you do not want to be
disturbed by the thought that Peter and Paul do the same: ‘It is extremely prosaic
to be reminded of one’s numerical significance: in the year 1750 Mr N.N. and
the virtuous Miss N.N., at ten o’clock; the same day, at eleven o’clock, Mr N.N.,
Miss N.N.’ That sounds perfectly dreadful, but your reasoning conceals a
reflection that has disturbed the first love. Love is, as noted above, a unity of the
universal and the singular, but the sense in which you want to enjoy the singular
shows a reflection that has put the singular outside the universal. The more the
singular and the universal permeate each other, the more beautiful the love. The
great thing is not to be the singular, either immediately or in a higher sense, but
in the singular to possess the universal. So it cannot be a disturbing preliminary
to first love to be reminded of the universal. Moreover, the wedding ceremony
does more than that. In order to point back to the universal it leads the lovers
back to the first parents. So it does not stop with the universal in abstracto, but
presents it as expressed in the human race’s first couple. This is a hint as to how
every marriage is. Every marriage, like every human life, is at once this
individual thing and yet the whole, an individual and a symbol at the same time.
Accordingly it gives the lovers the most beautiful picture of two people who are
not disturbed by the thought of others; it says to the individuals, ‘Thus you too
are a couple, it is the same event that has repeated itself in you, you too now
stand here alone in the infinite world, alone before the face of God.’ So you see
that the wedding ceremony also gives what you ask, but that in addition it gives
more, it gives the universal and the singular together.
‘But the marriage ceremony proclaims that sin has entered the world, and it
grates, after all, just when one feels most pure, to be reminded so forcibly of sin.
Further, it teaches that sin entered the world with marriage, and that seems
hardly an encouragement to the respective partners; of course the Church can
wash its hands if anything unfortunate comes out of it, since it hasn’t fostered
vain hopes.’ But should not the fact that the Church doesn’t foster vain hopes be
regarded as in itself something good? The Church says that sin entered the world
with marriage, but still allows marriage; it says that sin entered with marriage,
but it could still be a major question whether it teaches that it was because of
marriage that it entered. In any case it proclaims sin merely as the lot of man in
general, making no definite application to the individual, and least of all does it
say, ‘You are now just about to commit a sin.’ Indeed it is a very difficult matter
to explain in what sense sin entered with marriage. It could look as if sin and
sensuality were here being said to be the same; yet it cannot be quite like that,
seeing the Church allows marriage. ‘Yes,’ you will say, ‘that’s only when it has
taken away all that is beautiful from earthly love.’ ‘By no means,’ I would reply,
‘at least no word of that is to be found in the ceremony.’
Further, the Church proclaims the punishment of sin, that the woman shall bear
children with pain and obey her husband. But surely the first of these
consequences is such that, even if the Church were not to proclaim it, it would
proclaim itself. ‘Yes,’ you reply, ‘but what is disturbing is that it is asserted to be
the consequence of sin.’ You find it aesthetically beautiful that a child is born
with pain, it is a mark of respect for a human being, an emblematic indication of
the significance that lies, after all, in the fact that a human being enters the
world, as opposed to animals which, the lower they are on the scale, the more
easily they bring forth their young. Here I must stress again that it is proclaimed
as the lot of man in general, and that the fact that a child is born in sin is the
profoundest expression of its highest dignity, that it is indeed a glorification of
human life to refer everything that pertains to it to the category of sin.
Further, it is said that the woman shall obey the man. Here you may say, ‘Yes
that’s fine, and it has always appealed to me to see a woman who, in her
husband, loves her master.’ But you find it shocking that it should be a
consequence of sin, and you feel called upon to act as the woman’s knight.
Whether you do her a service thereby I leave undecided, but I believe you have
not grasped to the full the inner nature of woman, to which also belongs the fact
that she is at once more perfect and more imperfect than the man. If you want to
say what is purest and most perfect, you say ‘a woman’; if you want to say what
is weakest, you say ‘a woman’; if you want to illustrate spiritual ascendancy
over the sensual, you say ‘a woman’; if you want to illustrate the sensual, you
say ‘a woman’; if you want to say what innocence is in all its inspiring greatness,
you say ‘a woman’ when you want to say what the dispiriting feeling of guilt is,
you say ‘a woman’. So the woman is in a certain sense more perfect than the
man, and the Scriptures express this by saying she is more guilty. If you now
recall again that the Church only proclaims the lot of woman in general, then I
do not see how there can be anything in this to cause first love disquiet, but only
for the reflecting thought that does not know how to keep hold of her with this
possibility in mind. Besides, the Church does not make the woman a mere slave,
it says, ‘And God said, I will make for Adam a helpmeet for him’,
19 an
expression possessing as much aesthetic warmth as it has truth. Therefore the
Church teaches that, ‘a man shall leave his father and his mother, and shall
cleave unto his wife’.
20 One would almost have expected it to say, ‘The woman
shall leave her father and her mother and cleave unto her husband’, for the
woman is after all the weaker. In the Scriptures’ expression there lies an
acknowledgement of the woman’s importance, and no knight could be more
gallant towards her.
Finally, as for the curse which fell to the man’s lot, the circumstance that he
shall eat his bread in the sweat of his brow does indeed seem, in a single word,
to cast him out of the honeymoon of first love. The fact that this curse, like all
divine curses, as we have often been reminded, conceals within it a blessing,
here proves nothing, seeing that the experience of it must always be reserved for
a later time. What I would remind you, though, is that first love is not cowardly,
that it does not fear dangers, and that therefore it will see in this curse a difficulty
which cannot frighten it.
So what does the marriage ceremony do? ‘It brings the lovers to a standstill,’
you say. Not at all, it lets what was already in motion proceed openly. It brings
into the picture the universally human, and in that sense also sin; but all the
dread and anguish that wishes sin had not entered the world is based on a
reflection unknown to first love. To wish that sin had not entered the world is to
take humanity back to something less perfect. Sin has entered, but by humbling
themselves beneath it, individuals stand higher than they stood before.
The Church then turns to the single individual and puts several questions to
him. Which again appears to prompt a reflection: ‘What’s the point of such
questions? Love contains its own assurance.’ But the Church puts the questions
not to cause vacillation but to make firm, and to let what is already firm declare
itself. Here we meet the difficulty that the Church, in its questions, seems quite
unconcerned with the erotic. It asks whether you have consulted God and your
conscience and after that your friends and acquaintances. I shall not stress here
what great benefit there is in the Church’s putting such questions in deep
seriousness. The Church, to use one of your own expressions, is not a matchmaker.
21 Why then should the parties concerned be put off? In giving thanks they
have indeed referred their love to God, and in that sense consulted Him. For
even if only indirectly, thanking God is to consult Him. So the reason why the
Church does not ask them whether they love one another is not at all that it
wants to destroy earthly love, but because it takes it for granted.
The Church then exacts a vow. We saw above how splendidly love can merge
in a kind of higher concentricity. The intention makes the individual free, but as
already explained, the freer the individual, the more aesthetically beautiful is the
marriage.
Thus I believe it has become apparent that, in so far as one looks for the
aesthetic quality of first love in its presentational, immediate infinitude, marriage
must be regarded as the transfiguration of first love, and is even more beautiful
than it. This I believe is evident from the above, and in the immediately
preceding we have seen, too, that all this talk of the Church’s belittlement is
plucked out of thin air and applies only to the person who has taken offence at
religion.
But if that is so, the rest follows of itself. For the question is now whether this
love can be realized. Perhaps, having granted everything that has gone before,
you will say, ‘Marriage is as difficult to realize, after all, as first love.’ To this I
must answer, no. For in marriage there is a law of motion. The first love remains
an unreal An-sich
22 which never acquires inner substance because it moves
merely in an outer medium; in the ethical and religious intention, marital love
has the possibility of inner history and distinguishes itself from first love as the
historical from the non-historical. First love is strong, stronger than the whole
world, but the instant it occurs to it to doubt, it is annihilated; it is like a
sleepwalker who can proceed infinitely surefooted over the most dangerous
places, but as soon as you mention his name he plunges down. Marital love is
armed; its purpose directs attention not just at the surrounding world, the will is
directed inwardly at itself. And now I turn the whole thing around and say, ‘the
aesthetic lies not in the immediate but in the acquired.’ But marriage is precisely
the immediacy which has mediacy in itself, the infinity which has the finite in
itself, an eternity which has the temporal in itself. Thus marriage proves to be
ideal in a double sense, in both the classical and the romantic senses of the
word.
23
In saying that the aesthetic lies in the acquired, I do not at all mean that it
lies in the mere exertion; for that is negative and the merely negative is never
aesthetic. When, on the contrary, an exertion includes its own subject-matter, a
conflict its own victory, then in that duality I have the aesthetic. This is
something I think I ought to call to mind in view of the passion of despair with
which one can nowadays hear the acquired being praised against the immediate,
as though the whole point was at bottom to destroy everything in order to build
anew. Really it has alarmed me to hear the jubilation with which younger people,
like the men of terror in the French revolution, cry: de omnibus dubitandum.
24
Perhaps that is narrow-minded of me. Still, I believe one must distinguish
between a personal and a scientific doubt. Personal doubt is always about
something special, and a passion for annihilation of the kind one so often hears
talk of leads at most to a crowd of people venturing out without having the
strength to doubt, and failing, or else ending in some half-measures which is
certain failure just the same. If the struggle of doubt within a particular
individual develops, on the contrary, the strength which again overcomes the
doubt, then that sight is an inspiring one by showing what a person is on his own
account, but not really a beautiful one; for that it needs immediacy in itself. A
development of that kind, brought about in the highest degree by doubt, strives
towards what one in an extreme case calls turning someone into a quite different
person. Beauty here consists, on the contrary, in the immediate’s being acquired
in and along with the doubt. I have to stress this against the abstract form in
which doubt has been invoked, the way it has been deified, the recklessness with
which people have plunged into it, the blind faith with which they hope for a
glorious outcome. It should also be remarked that the more spiritual the gain, the
more one can extol doubt; but love belongs always to a province where you
cannot so much talk of an acquiring as of a giving, and of a giving which is
acquired. I have no idea what kind of doubt this should be. Are we to say that the
proper situation of a husband is to have had distressing experiences, to have
learned to doubt, and that the truly beautiful marriage is the one that proceeded
when now, on the strength of this doubt and with great moral seriousness, he
married and as a husband was faithful and constant? We would praise him but
we would not extol his marriage, except as an example of what a human being is
capable of. Or, to be a doubter with a vengeance, should he also doubt her love,
the possibility of retaining the beauty of this relationship, but yet have enough
stoicism to will it? I know quite well how very ready you false teachers are to
praise such a thing, just so that your false teaching can find better acceptance;
you praise it when it suits your purpose and say, look, that’s a true marriage. But
you know quite well that in this praise there lurks a censure, and particularly the
woman is far from being well served thereby, and so you do everything to tempt
her. Therefore you make a distinction according to the old maxim, ‘Divide and
rule.’ You praise first love. It remains, as you tell it, an instant lying outside time,
a mysterious something about which one can make up any lie. Marriage cannot
hide itself in that way; it takes days and years to unfold. How easy then the
opportunity to tear down or build up with perfidious considerations of this kind,
so that it needs a despairing resignation to endure it.
This, then, we are agreed on: marital love considered on its own is not only as
beautiful as first love, it is even more beautiful because in its immediacy it
contains the unity of a larger number of opposites. So it is not true that marriage
is a highly respectable personage but a tiresomely moral one, while love is
poetry. No, really it is marriage that is poetic. And if the world has so often
painfully observed that first love could not be fulfilled, then I will readily join in
the grief, but also draw attention to the fact that the mistake lay not so much in
what came later as in one’s not having begun correctly. For first love lacks the
second aesthetic ideal, the element of history. There is no law of motion in it.
Were I to treat personal faith as immediate in the same way, then what
corresponded to first love would be a faith which believed itself, on the strength
of divine assurance, capable of moving mountains, and would then go about
working miracles. Perhaps it would succeed, but this faith would have no
history, for the check-list of all its miraculous deeds is not its history; on the
contrary, the history of faith is the appropriation of faith in personal life. Marital
love has this movement, for in the intention the movement is turned inwards.
The religious aspect leaves it as though to God to look after the whole world, the
intention makes it ready in union with God to strive for itself, to acquire itself in
patience. The consciousness of sin contains a conception of human frailty, but in
the intention it is represented as overcome. This I cannot sufficiently stress in
regard to marital love. I have certainly done full justice to first love and think I
am a better judge of it than you, but its fault is to be found in its abstract
character. […]
The historical nature of marital love is apparent from its being a process of
assimilation; it tries its hand in what it experiences and refers its experience back
to itself. Accordingly it is not a disinterested witness of what occurs but
essentially a participant; in short, it experiences its own development. Romantic
love, too, refers its experiences to itself, as when the knight sends his beloved
the banners, etc. won in battle; but even if romantic love could imagine a
considerable time being spent on all such conquests, it could never occur to it
that the love should have had a history. The prosaic view goes to the opposite
extreme; it can well grasp that love should acquire a history, usually a short
history, so plain and pedestrian that the love soon acquires feet to walk upon.
Experimental love, too, acquires a kind of history, yet is as if without true
apriority,
25 also without continuity, and rests merely upon the caprice of the
experimenting individual who is his own world and its fate simultaneously.
Experimental love is therefore very apt to inquire about its own condition and so
has a double joy, one part in its outcome corresponding to the calculation, and
another when something quite else transpires. In the latter case it is also content
inasmuch as it finds a task for its inexhaustible combinations. Marital love has
apriority in itself, but likewise constancy, and the strength in this constancy is the
same as the law of its motion, the intention. The intention posits something else
but posits it also as that which is overcome; the something else is posited in the
intention as something inner, inasmuch as the outer is itself seen reflected in the
inner. The historical aspect consists in this something else coming to light,
acquiring its validity, but seen precisely in its validity as something that is not
about to become valid, so that love emerges tested and purified from this
movement and assimilates the experience. For the individual who does not adopt
an experimental attitude, how this something else comes to light is not under his
control; yet love has, likewise in its apriority, triumphed over the whole thing
without knowing it. It says somewhere in the New Testament, ‘For every
creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be received with
thanksgiving.’
26 Most people are ready to be grateful when they receive a good
gift, but at the same time they demand that it be left to them to decide what
present is good. This shows their narrow-mindedness. That other gratitude, on
the other hand, is truly triumphant and a priori since it contains in itself an
eternal health which not even an evil gift can disturb, not because one knows
how to hold it at a distance, but because of the boldness, the high degree of
personal courage, which dares to give thanks for it. So, too, with love. Here it
could not occur to me to reflect on all the Jeremiads you maliciously keep in
constant readiness for the edification of concerned husbands; and I hope this
time you will restrain yourself, seeing that here you are dealing with a husband
who cannot tempt you into amusing yourself by making him still more confused.
But in the course of my pursuit of love from its cryptogamous concealment to
its phanerogamous life,
27
I stumble upon a difficulty which you will certainly say
is of no little significance. Posito, I assume for argument, that I have succeeded
in convincing you that those religious and ethical factors which in marital love
join first love by no means diminish the latter, that in your heart of hearts you are
really deeply convinced of this and now by no means scorn a religious point of
departure. You would therefore, alone with the one you loved, be ready to
humble yourself and your love under God; you are really much impressed and
moved – but watch out now! I mention a word, ‘congregation’, and immediately,
as in the ballad, everything vanishes again.
28 To get beyond the category of
inwardness, that I think is something you will never succeed in. ‘Congregation,
the dear congregation, which in spite of its diversity is still a moral personage;
yes, if only, just as it has all a moral person’s tiresome qualities, it likewise had
the good quality of having but one head on one neck – I know what I would
do.’
29 You no doubt know there was a madman whose idée fixe was that the
room he lived in was full of flies,
30 so that he was in danger of being choked by
them. He fought with the fear and the fury of despair for his very existence. Thus
you, too, appear to fight for your life against a similar imaginary swarm of flies,
against what you call ‘the congregation’. Not such a dangerous matter, however,
but I will first go over the most important points of contact with the
congregation. Before that I would merely remind you that first love can scarcely
count it an advantage that it knows no such difficulties; for that fact is due to its
being kept abstract and having no contact at all with reality.
You will know very well how to discriminate between those abstract
relationships to a surrounding world whose abstraction cancels the relationship.
Having to pay a priest and a parish clerk and a functionary of the law, that’s
something you can put up with, for money is an excellent means of removing
any relationship; which is why you also initiated me into your plan never, ever to
do anything or ever receive anything, not the slightest thing, without giving or
receiving money. Yes, if we look a little at the matter, were you ever to marry,
you would be capable of paying a douceur to everyone who came to witness
your joy in taking that step. It must not surprise you if in that case the
congregation grows in numbers, or if what the man with the flies feared actually
befalls you. The personal relationships you are afraid of are those which, in
inquiries, congratulations, compliments, yes, even presents, aspire to enter into a
relation with you that cannot be measured in money, and to show how
enthusiastically they share in your joy, though on just this occasion you for your
part and that of your loved one would rather they didn’t share in it. ‘Money, after
all, gets you out of a mass of ludicrous situations. With it you can stop the mouth
of the church trumpeter who would otherwise make as though to herald the
opening of the Royal Assizes, money can get you out of being pronounced a
husband, an upright husband, before the whole congregation when you want to
limit yourself to being that just for one person.’ This is not my invention, this
portrait, it is yours. Can you recall how you once fumed on the occasion of a
church wedding? You asked, why not let the whole tenderly sharing fraternity
bestow a congregational kiss upon the bride and bridegroom, just as clerics
present at ordinations come forward to lay their hands upon the ordinand! Yes,
you said you were unable to mention the words ‘bride’ and ‘bridegroom’ without
thinking of the big moment when a dear father or a friend of long standing rises
with his glass unctuously to intone those beautiful words ‘bride and
bridegroom’. For just as you found the whole church ceremony excellently
suited to stifling the erotic, so is there as great an absence of decency in the
subsequent worldly proceedings as there was an excess of it in the church
ceremony; ‘after all, wasn’t it indecent, ludicrous, tasteless to place such an
almost man and wife at a dining-table and convey the partial, untrue, and
indelicate thought that it might not be up to the Church to ordain them man and
wife’. So you seem to favour a quiet wedding. To that I have no objection, but
merely inform you that you will be pronounced a properly married man just as
fully there. Perhaps you can bear those words better when no one else hears
them. I have to remind you, moreover, that it does not say ‘before the whole
congregation’, but ‘before God and the congregation’, which is neither
discomfortingly narrow nor lacking in boldness.
As for what else you have to say in this respect, that I can more easily forgive
even if it comes with the usual intemperance, because it is only the social
relationships you attack. […] In my view the great thing is to live in them, to
bring something finer out of them if one can; if one can’t, to subordinate oneself
to them and put up with them. I do not see that love is at all endangered by
publishing banns from the pulpit; nor do I believe such publication is harmful for
the hearers, as your overwrought severity once led you to divine when you
proposed that the announcing of banns be abolished because that is what so
many people, especially women, went to church just to hear, so that the impact
of the sermon was destroyed. There is something untrue at the bottom of your
anxiety, as if all small things of this kind were able to disturb a healthy and
strong love. […] Another explanation I can offer of your great anxiety at all this
privity and fuss is that you are afraid of missing the erotic instant. You know
how to keep your soul as motionless as a bird of prey before it swoops; you
realize the instant is not within one’s power and that yet it contains the most
beautiful experience; therefore you know how to watch out, you do not want to
anticipate anything in the restlessness with which you await the instant. But
when an event like this is now fixed for a definite time which one knows well in
advance, when the preparations constantly remind one of it, one runs the risk of
‘missing the point’. From this one sees you have not grasped the nature of
marital love and that you cherish a heathen superstition for first love. […]
Every process of becoming, precisely the more healthy it is, always has
something polemical about it, and every marital connection has that too, and you
know very well that I hate that family laxity, that insipid community of goods
which can give a marriage the appearance of being entered into with the entire
family. If marital love is a true first love, then there is also something
undisclosed about it. It does not want to present itself to view, does not stake its
life on mounting guard over the families, does not draw its sustenance from
congratulations and compliments or from idolatry, in the way the family can lend
itself to. This you know very well – just let your wit make play with all that. In
many ways I can well agree with you, and I believe that it would not hurt you or
the good cause if occasionally you allowed me, as the experienced, loving
forester, to mark the rotten trees for felling, but also in other places to mark a
cross.
I have absolutely no reservations, now, in declaring secretiveness to be the
absolute condition for the safeguarding of the aesthetic in marriage, not in the
way that one should make a point of it, chase after it, take it in vain, place the
real pleasure simply in savouring the secretiveness. It is one of first love’s pet
notions that it wants to run off to an uninhabited island. This has been ridiculed
enough, I will take no part in the wild iconoclasm of our time. The fault lies in
the fact that first love believes that taking flight is the only way it can be
realized. That is a misunderstanding which stems from its non-historical
character. The art is to remain in the multiplicity and yet preserve the
secretiveness. Here again I might dwell, by way of a prudential maxim, on its
only by being among people that the secretiveness acquires its true energy, that it
is only with this resistance that its point bores more and more deeply in. But I
will not do so, for the same reason as before, and also because I always
acknowledge a relationship to other persons as something real. But for that one
needs art, and marital love does not run away from these difficulties; it preserves
and appropriates them. Besides, marital love has so much else to think about that
it has no time to get itself bogged down in a polemic against the particular.
Inwardly this principal condition goes as follows: openheartedness,
uprightness, publicity on the largest conceivable scale; for this is the lifeprinciple of love, and secretiveness here is its death. However, this is easier said
than done, and truly it needs courage to carry it out consistently; for you no
doubt realize that I am thinking of something more than the gabbling prattle
which is rife in family marriages. Naturally there can only be talk of publicity
where there can be talk of secretiveness; but the more there is talk of the latter,
the more difficult the former becomes. It needs courage to reveal oneself as one
truly is, it needs courage not to want to purchase one’s freedom from a little
humiliation when one can do that through a certain secretiveness, not to want to
purchase oneself a little addition to one’s stature when one can do that by being
reticent. It needs courage to want to be healthy, to want the truth in all honesty
and candour.
But let us begin with something less momentous. It was in connection with a
newly-wed couple who saw themselves obliged to ‘limit their love within the
narrow confines of three small rooms’ that you took a little excursion into the
realm of fantasy, though that realm borders so close on your daily residence that
one doubts whether it should be called an excursion. You then devoted yourself
with the greatest care and taste to decorating your future as you could wish it.
[…] So you imagined yourself married, happily married, after having delivered
your love inviolate from all adversity, and you were now deliberating how you
would arrange everything in your home so that your love could preserve its
fragrance as long as possible. For that you needed more than three rooms. I
granted you this, seeing that as a bachelor you use five. It would be disagreeable
for you to have to give up one of your rooms to your wife; as far as that goes you
would hand over four of them to her and live in the fifth rather than share one in
common. After pondering these inconveniences you continued, ‘I take the three
rooms in question as my point of departure, but not in a philosophical sense, for
I’ve no intention of returning to them, on the contrary, I intend getting as far
away from them as possible.’ Yes, such was your aversion to three small rooms
that, if you could not have more, you would prefer to live like a vagrant under
the open sky, though that in the last resort was so poetic as to require a
considerable suite of rooms in compensation. I tried to call you to order by
reminding you that this was one of the customary heresies of non-historical first
love, and then was very happy to accompany you through the many big, cool,
high-vaulted halls in your castle in the air, through the private, half-darkened
salons, the dining-rooms illuminated into the farthest corners by lights and
chandeliers and mirrors, the small room with double doors opening out onto the
balcony where the morning sun fell and a scent of flowers, which breathed only
for you and your love, wafted towards us. Here I will not pursue your bold steps
further as, like a chamois hunter, you leap from one peak to another. All that I
shall discuss a little more closely is the principle behind your arrangement. Your
principle was obviously secretiveness, mystification, refined coquetry. It was not
just that the walls in your rooms were to be edged with glass, but the world of
your consciousness was also to be multiplicated with similar refracted beams of
light. Not just everywhere in the room but also everywhere in consciousness you
would meet her and you, and you and her. ‘But for this to be possible all the
riches in the world are not enough, it needs spirit, and a wise moderation
controlling the powers of the spirit. So one must be strangers enough to each
other for familiarity to be interesting, familiar enough for strangeness to form a
titillating resistance. The married life must not be a dressing-gown one makes
oneself comfortable in, but neither a corset that hampers one’s movements; it
must not be a labour that needs strenuous preparation, but not a dissolute
indolence either; it must bear the stamp of the accidental, yet in the distance one
must discern an art. One doesn’t exactly have to stare oneself blind day and night
stitching a carpet big enough to cover the floor in the great hall; on the other
hand the slightest little curiosity can very well have some small secret sign on its
border. One doesn’t exactly have to have one’s monogram on the cake every day
one eats together, yet there can certainly be some small telegraphic allusion. It’s
a matter of postponing as far as possible that point at which one suspects the
movement is circular, that point where repetition begins; and when it can’t be
postponed altogether, it’s a matter of having made adjustments to allow for
variation. One has only a certain number of texts, if one preaches oneself out the
first Sunday then not only is there nothing left for the whole of the next year,
there is not even enough for the first Sunday next year. One should remain to
some degree enigmatic to one another as long as possible, and so far as one
successively reveals oneself, this must be done with as much use of accidental
circumstance as possible, making it relative in a way that allows this, too, to be
viewed from many other sides. One must be on one’s guard against all surfeit
and after-taste.’ So you want to live on the ground floor of this lordly castle,
which should be situated in a beautiful district but in the vicinity of the capital.
Your wife, your consort, should occupy the left-hand wing of the first floor. It is
something you have always envied princely people, that man and wife lived
separately. But what took the aesthetic away again from a court life of this kind
was a ceremonial that claimed priority to love. One is announced, one waits a
moment, one is received. That in itself did not lack beauty, but it only assumed
its true beauty when it became a move in the divine game of love, when it was
ascribed a validity in such a way that one could just as well deprive it of its
validity. The love one was in would itself have to have many limits, but every
limit would also have to be a thrilling temptation to transcend that limit. So you
lived on the ground floor where you had your library, billiard-room, audiencechamber, closet, bedroom. Your wife lived on the first floor. Here, too, was your
bridal suite, a large room with two closets, one on each side. There would have
to be nothing to remind you or your wife that you were married, and yet again
everything should be such that no unmarried person could have it thus. You
would not be aware of what your wife was up to, or she of what you occupied
yourself with; this, however, not at all so as to be inactive or to forget one
another, but to be able to give each contact significance, to remove that moment
of death when you looked at each other and, behold, you were bored! So you
would not trudge about in matrimonial procession on each other’s arm; for a
long time to come you would follow her with youthful infatuation from your
window as she walked in the garden, you would prepare your eyes to look out
for her, lose yourself in the contemplation of her image when it vanished from
your sight. You would steal after her, yes, probably on occasion she would also
rest on your arm – after all there was always something beautiful in what had
become a traditional way among people of expressing a particular feeling; and
you would give her your arm, half giving what is beautiful in this custom its due,
half making fun of walking in this way like a proper married couple. Yet, where
should my pursuit of the clever refinements of your ingenious head be able to
find its end in this Asiatic luxuriance, which almost wearies me and makes me
wish myself back with the three small rooms you passed so proudly by!
If there were anything aesthetically beautiful in this whole view, then one
should probably look for it partly in the hints you drop of erotic bashfulness,
partly in not wanting at any point to possess the loved one as though possession
were already gained, but continue constantly to try to gain it. The latter is in
itself true and right, but the task by no means set with erotic seriousness, and
accordingly so far not solved either. You were clinging constantly to an
immediacy as such, to a category of nature, not daring to let it be transfigured in
a common consciousness; for this is what I have meant by uprightness and
openness. You fear that when the enigma has gone love will cease, while I
believe that only when it has gone does love begin. You fear that one dare not
altogether know what one loves, you reckon with the incommensurable as an
absolutely vital ingredient, while I maintain that only when one knows what one
loves does one truly love. Furthermore, all your good fortune lacks a blessing,
for it lacks adversity; and since that is a fault it is also, in so far as you were
actually to mislead someone with your theory, just as well that it is not true. Let
us then turn to the realities of life. In insisting on the part played by adversity, it
is far from my intention to let you identify marriage with a catalogue of
tribulations. On the contrary, adversity’s contribution is already to be found in
the resignation contained in the intention, as explained earlier, but without yet
having assumed any definite shape or being a cause of anxiety, because in the
intention they are looked upon as already overcome. Moreover, the adversity is
not seen outwardly but inwardly, as it is reflected in the individual. The
secretiveness becomes, as explained above, a contradiction when it has nothing
to deposit in its secrecy, a puerility when all its cellar contains are amorous
knick-knacks. Only when the individual’s heart is truly opened by love, when
love has made him eloquent far more profoundly than the usual sense in which
love is said to make one that (for even a seducer can have eloquence of that
kind), only when the individual has thus deposited everything in the shared
consciousness, only then does secretiveness acquire strength, life and meaning.
But this calls for a decisive step, and thus courage too; without it married love
lapses into nothing, for it is only through this that one shows that one loves not
oneself but another. How is one to show that except by being only for the other,
yet how can one be only for another except by not being for oneself? But being
for oneself is the most general characterization of the secretiveness of the
individual life when it remains in itself. Love is to give of oneself, but I can give
of myself only if I go out of myself; how then can it be reconciled with the
concealment that wants precisely to remain in itself? ‘But one suffers loss by
revealing oneself in that way’; yes, of course, anyone who profits by being
secretive suffers loss. But to be consistent, you would have to go much further,
you would have to advise not just against marriage but against every form of
personal approach, and how will your clever head deal with communication by
telegraph? The most interesting reading is that in which the reader himself is to a
degree productive; truly erotic artfulness would be to make an impression at a
distance, an impression which would be highly dangerous for the person in
question just because there was nothing from which she herself had created her
object and loved now her creation; that is not love but the coquetry of the
seducer. The person who loves is, on the contrary, one who has lost himself in
another; but in losing and forgetting himself in the other he is revealed to the
other, and in forgetting himself he is recalled in the other. The person who loves
is not one who will want to be mistaken for the other, whether a better or a
poorer, and the person who lacks this deference to himself and to the other does
not love. In general therefore secretiveness has its basis in a pettiness which
would like to add a cubit to its stature. The person who has not learnt to scorn
this has never loved; for if he had he would have felt that even if ten cubits were
added to his stature, he was still too lowly. […]
First love can wish with supernatural pathos, but this wish can easily become
an ‘in case’ without content, and our lives are not so paradisal that our Lord
gives every married couple the whole world to do with as it likes. Married love
knows better. Its movements are not outwards but inwards, and here it is soon
aware that it has a wide world to itself, but also that every little constraint on its
self has a quite other commensurability with the infinitude of love; and even if it
feels pain because there is so much to fight against, so too it feels courage for
this contest. Yes, it is daring enough to outdo you in paradoxes in practically
taking pleasure in sin’s having entered the world; but it has the daring to outdo
you in paradoxes in another sense too: it has the courage to resolve them. For
marital love, like first love, knows all these obstacles are overcome in the
infinite moment of love. But it also knows that the historical element in it is
precisely the gaining of this victory, and that gaining it is not just a game but also
a conflict, though also not just a conflict but also a game, as the conflict in
Valhalla was a life-and-death struggle and yet still a game, since the contestants
continually rose again rejuvenated from the dead. It also knows that this fencing
is not an arbitrary duel but a conflict under divine patronage; and it feels no need
to love more than one, yet feels a blessedness herein, and no need to love more
than once, yet feels an eternity herein. And is it still your belief that this love
which has no secrets forgoes something beautiful? Or that it is unable to resist
time but must needs be blunted by daily association? Or that boredom overtakes
it more swiftly, as though marital love did not possess an eternal content of
which one never grows tired, an eternal content which it acquires, and is
constantly acquiring, now with a kiss and a jest, now with fear and trembling?
[…]
Yet not infrequently one sees marriages in which the secrecy system is carried
through to perfection. I have never seen a happy one in which that was the case.
However, since that may be due entirely to accident, I shall state what reasons
there are in general for its being so. This is important for me here, for an
aesthetically beautiful marriage is always a happy marriage, so if a happy
marriage could be built on that basis my theory would have to be changed. I will
shun none of its guises and will describe each as fairly as I can, especially one
which, in the house where I saw it realized, was accomplished with a virtuosity
which was really fascinating.
Generally, you will admit, the secrecy system proceeds from the husbands, and
notwithstanding it is always wrong, this is still more tolerable than the
intolerable kind where it is the wife who wields such a dominium. The ugliest
form is, of course, a pure despotism in which the wife is a slave, a maid-of-allwork in the domestic arrangements. Such a marriage is never happy, even if the
years bring a dullness which comes to terms with it. A more becoming form is
the very opposite of this, a misplaced solicitude. ‘Woman is weak,’ they say, ‘she
cannot endure sorrow and anxiety; the weak and frail must be handled lovingly.’
Falsehood! Falsehood! The woman is just as strong as the man, maybe stronger.
And do you really treat her lovingly when you thus humiliate her? Who gave
you leave to humiliate her? How can your soul be so blind that you take yourself
to be a more perfect being than her? Just confide everything to her! If she’s weak
she can’t bear it; but then, of course, she has you to lean upon, you have the
strength for that. But look! You can’t stand that, that is something you do not
have the strength for. So it is you who lacks strength, not her. […]
For a time I frequented a house where I had the opportunity to observe the
silence system put into effect in a more artistic and refined manner. The man was
fairly young, unusually gifted, with an excellent mind and of a poetic
disposition, too lazy to produce anything himself but with an extraordinary flair
and sense for making daily life itself poetic. His wife was young, not
unintelligent, but of an exceptional character. This tempted him. His ability to
arouse and nourish every youthful conceit in her was truly astonishing. Her
whole life, their life together, was a tapestry of poetic enchantment. His eye was
everywhere; when she looked round, his eye was averted. His finger was in
everything, but no more literally or, in a finite sense, really than God’s is present
in history. Whichever way her thought might turn, he was there beforehand; like
Potem-kin he knew how to conjure up landscapes,
31 and of just the sort, after a
little surprise, a little hesitation, to please her. His domestic life was a Creation
story in miniature, and just as everything in Creation focuses on mankind, so
was she the centre in an enchanted circle in which she nevertheless enjoyed her
full freedom, for the circle would bend to comply with her and had no boundary
of which it might be said, ‘Here and no further!’. Plunge where she might,
whichever way she went the circle gave way but still remained there. She walked
as if in a toddler’s practice basket, yet not one braided with withies; it was
woven out of her hopes, dreams, longings, wishes, fears, in short it was formed
out of the whole content of her soul. He himself, in this dream world, moved
with great certainty, he surrendered none of his dignity, claimed and asserted his
authority as man and lord. She would have been upset had he not done so; it
might have aroused in her an anxious suspicion which could lead to the secrecy
being dissolved. He seemed, not only to the world at large but to her too, to be
such a considerate person; yet inside he knew that every impression she got of
him was just as he wished it, and he knew that it was in his power with a single
word to dispel the enchantment. All that she might find disagreeable was
removed; if anything of the kind occurred, she would receive, whether after
being allowed to press her own inquiries or in candid anticipation of these, by
way of frank notification an account he had himself drafted, in stronger or
weaker terms, according to the impression he had calculated on. He was proud,
fearfully consistent, he loved her, but he could not abandon the proud thought,
which came to him deep in the still of the night or in an instant outside time, of
venturing to say to himself, ‘Yes, she owes everything to me.’ – You have
followed this description with interest, have you not? however imperfectly I
have succeeded. Because it conjures up a picture in your soul with which you
sympathize, which perhaps you would try sometime to put into practice yourself
if you became a husband. Was this, then, a happy marriage? Yes, if you like, yet
there hovered a dark fate over that happiness. Suppose he failed, suppose she
suddenly suspected something. I do not think she could ever forgive him; her
proud soul was too proud to let it be said that he had done it from love for her.
There is an old-fashioned expression for the relation between a married couple,
of which I will remind you here (in any case I always like to support the
revolution, or rather the holy war, in which the plain and simple but true and rich
expressions strive to win back the realm from which the novel has expelled
them). It is said of married people that they should live on a good understanding
with one another. Most often one hears it expressed negatively: a couple does not
live on a good understanding, and then one usually thinks of their being unable
to stand one another, of their fighting, quarrelling, etc. Take now the positive
expression. The married couple described, do they not live on a good
understanding? Yes, that is what the world would say, though not you, surely; for
how could they live on a good understanding when they do not understand one
another? Yet is it not part of the understanding that the one knows how solicitous
and loving the other is? Or if he deprived her of nothing else, he deprived her of
the opportunity for that degree of gratitude in which her soul would have found
repose. Is it not a pretty, a becoming, and an uncomplicated expression: to live
on a good understanding? […]
So you see, the secrecy system is by no means conducive to a happy, and thus
neither to an aesthetically beautiful marriage. No, my friend; honesty,
openheartedness, revelation, understanding, that is the life-principle in marriage;
without it marriage is unattractive and indeed unethical, for then it separates
what love joins, the sensual and the spiritual. Only when the being I live with in
earthly life’s most tender association is just as close in spiritual respects – only
then is my marriage ethical and therefore also aesthetically attractive. And you
proud men who perhaps rejoice silently at this victorious triumph over women,
you forget, in the first place, that it is not a good triumph when one triumphs
over the weaker, and that the man honours himself in his wife – and the man
who does not do that? He despises himself.
So understanding is the life-principle in marriage. One often hears people of
experience discussing when one should advise against marriage. Let them
discuss these circumstances as thoroughly and interminably as they will:
generally what they say amounts to very little. I, for my part, will mention just
one case, that is, when the complications in the individual life are such that it is
unable to reveal itself. If the history of your inner development contains
something unutterable, or if your life has made you privy to secrets – in short, if
in one way or another you have gorged yourself on a secret which cannot be
dragged out of you without costing you your life, then never marry. Either you
will feel tied to a being who has no suspicion of what is going on in you, and
your marriage then becomes an uncomely misalliance, or you bind yourself to a
being who is anxiously aware of this, who at every instant sees these shadowimages on the wall. She may resolve never to cross-examine you, never to come
too close, she will renounce the apprehensive curiosity that tempts her, but she
will never be happy, nor you either. […] But having now mentioned
secretiveness and understanding as two sides of the same matter, this being the
main thing about love as the absolute condition for preserving the aesthetic in
marriage, I am no doubt liable to be faced with the objection, on your part, that I
seem here to be forgetting ‘what I otherwise harp on as insistently as the refrain
in a song’, namely the historical character of marriage. You yourself have hopes
of putting time to the test with the help of your secretiveness and your cleverly
calculated relative information, ‘but when married folk get down to telling their
story, short or long, they soon come to the point where one says, “and that’s the
end of the story”’. My young friend, what you fail to notice is that it is only
because you are not properly placed that you can make such an objection. By
virtue of your secretiveness, you have a time dimension in you, and it really is a
matter of time being put to the test. Through revelation, however, love has, on
the contrary, an eternal dimension, and so all concurrence becomes impossible.
Also, it is just a wilful misunderstanding to think of this revelation as a matter of
married people spending a fortnight recounting their careers, followed by a
deathly silence broken only now and then by a [retelling of] the sufficiently
familiar story – ‘as is told somewhere in a fairy-tale of a mill that, while all this
was happening, went clip, clap, clip, clap’. The historical character of marriage
makes of this understanding precisely as much a matter of constant development
as an all-at-once affair. It is the same as in an individual life. Just because one
has arrived at clarity about oneself, has had the courage to be willing to see
oneself, it by no means follows that the story is now over; it is now that it first
begins, acquires for the first time a proper meaning through referring each lived
moment to this total view. So too in marriage. The immediacy of first love
founders upon this revelation, yet is not lost but assumed into the knowledge the
marriage shares. With this the story begins, and the particular is referred to this
shared knowledge; in this lies its felicity, an expression in which again the
historical character of marriage is preserved, and which corresponds to the
blitheness, or what the Germans call Heiterkeit, which first love has.
It is essential, accordingly, for married love to become historical, and because
the individuals are now properly placed, the commandment, ‘In the sweat of thy
brow shalt thou eat bread’, is not a terrible and unexpected message. And the
courage and strength married love feels corresponds to the romantic need of
knightly love for adventurous exploits, and is the element of truth in that. Just as
the knight is without fear, so too is married love, notwithstanding the foes it has
to contend with are often far more dangerous. Here a broad vista opens up to
observation, into which it is not, however, my intention to enter. But if we let the
knight say that the man who does not defy the whole world in order to save his
beloved does not know knightly love, then we should let the husband say the
same. Except that I must always remind you that every victory of this sort that
married love wins is more aesthetically beautiful than the one which the knight
wins, because in winning this victory it also wins its own glorification. It fears
nothing, not even small deviations, it has no fear of minor infatuations, on the
contrary, these too serve only to nourish the divine wholesomeness of married
love. Even Ottilia in Goethe’s Elective Affinities is ploughed under as but a
tender possibility by the serious marital love; how much more, then, should a
deeply religious and ethically planned marriage have the strength for that! Yes,
just what Goethe’s Elective Affinities provides is proof of what secretiveness
leads to. That love would not have acquired such power if it had not been
allowed to grow in tranquillity. Had he had the courage to open himself to his
wife it would have been averted, and the whole story would have become a
divertissement in the drama of the marriage. The fateful part is that Edvard and
his wife both have affairs simultaneously; but this is again the fault of their
keeping silent. The husband who has strength to confide in his wife that he loves
another – he is saved, and so too the wife. But when he does not have it, he loses
confidence in himself, and so what he looks for is forgetfulness in the love of
another. Undoubtedly, it is as much the pain of not having resisted in time, as
true love for the other, that brings a man to yield. He feels he has lost himself,
and when that feeling first occurs, it takes strong opiates to deaden it.
The difficulties marital love has to contend with I will discuss only in quite
general terms, to show that they are not so important that marital love has
anything to fear from them as far as the preservation of the aesthetic is
concerned. […] I can divide these difficulties into the external and the internal,
though always remembering the relative nature of such a division in the case of
marriage, where of course everything is internal. First, then, the external
difficulties. I am by no means reluctant or afraid to mention all these depressing,
humiliating, vexatious finite afflictions, in short everything that goes to make up
a tearful drama. Here, as everywhere, you and your ilk are exceedingly arbitrary.
If a drama of this kind obliges you to undertake such a peregrination through the
caves of misfortune, then you say it is unaesthetic, snivelling and tiresome. And
you are right. But why? Because you are indignant that something sublime and
noble should succumb to the like of this. If you turn to the real world, on the
other hand, and there meet a family which has undergone half the adversities a
hangman of a playwright has devised for that delicious pleasure, reserved for
tyrants, of torturing others, you get the shivers; you think, ‘Goodnight to all
aesthetic beauty.’ You show compassion, you are ready to help if for no other
reason than to strip away the gloomy thoughts, but you have already long ago
given up hope on the unfortunate family’s behalf. Yet if it is true in real life, the
poet has the right to present it and he is in the right when he does so. When you
are sitting in the theatre, intoxicated with aesthetic enjoyment, you have the
bravado to require the poet to let the aesthetic triumph over all misery. It is the
only comfort left, and, even more effeminately, you, whose own strength has not
been given a chance to test itself by life, grasp it. […] If it is true, as you teach
and proclaim in life, that adversity on a far smaller scale can put a person in
thrall, make him walk with head bowed and forgetful that he, too, is created in
God’s image, then please God let it be your just punishment that all playwrights
write nothing but lachrymose dramas of all possible terror and ruination, pieces
which would not let your effeminacy recline on theatre cushions, nor give you a
chance to spread your unnaturally pungent perfume, but which might frighten
you into learning to believe in reality what you want only to believe in the form
of poetry. I have not, in my own marriage, experienced many adversities of this
kind, that I freely admit, so I cannot speak from experience; still, I am convinced
that nothing is capable of crushing the aesthetic in a person. It is a conviction so
powerful, so felicitous, so heartfelt, that I thank God for it, as for a gift of grace.
And when we read in the Holy Scriptures of the many gifts of grace, I would
really count among them the frankness, the confidence, the trust in reality and in
the eternal necessity with which beauty triumphs, and in the blessedness that lies
in the freedom with which the individual comes to the aid of God. And this
conviction is an element in my whole spiritual make-up; I do not permit myself
to be convulsed in effeminate and voluptuous tremors by the artificial stimulus
of the theatre. All I can do is thank God for this unshakeableness in my soul, but
in doing so I would also hope to have exempted my soul from taking it in vain.
You know I hate all experimenting, but a person is supposed to be able in
thought to have experienced much that he never gets to experience in reality.
There are occasional moments of despondency, and when a person does not
evoke these arbitrarily, to try his hand at such things, this too is a contest, an
extremely serious contest, and in this contest an assurance can be gained which,
even if it does not have quite the reality it would have acquired in real life, is still
of great importance. Sometimes in life it is a good sign, and a sign of something
great, that a person fails like a madman to separate the worlds of poetry and
reality but sees the latter sub specie poeseos.
32 Somewhere, in one of his sermons
where he is speaking of poverty and need, Luther says, ‘One has never heard of
a Christian person dying of hunger.’ With that Luther is finished with the matter
and thinks, surely with good reason, that he has spoken of it with much unction
and to the genuine edification of his readers.
To the extent, then, that marriage involves such external trials, the thing to do,
of course, is to make them internal. I say ‘of course’ and am pretty free-spoken
about all this, but it is to you, and only to you, I am writing, and we two have
probably just about the same amount of experience of this kind of adversity. The
thing, then, is to turn the external adversity into an internal one. […] It is not at
all to be denied, as your quick mind will soon grasp, that this very changing of
the external trial to an internal one can make it still harder; but then nor do the
gods sell anything great for nothing, and it is exactly here that the educative, the
idealizing effect in marriage lies. It is often said that when one stands alone in
the world it is easier to bear such things. True enough, to some extent; but often
this saying conceals a significant untruth. For how is it that one is able to bear
them more easily? By being able to throw oneself away, suffer damage to one’s
soul without its being anyone else’s concern, by being able to forget God, let the
storm of despair drown out the scream of pain, by being able to become dulled,
and find one’s pleasure in living practically like a ghost among people. Of course
everyone, even if he stands alone, should mind himself, but only he who loves
has a proper conception of what he is and what he is capable of, and only
marriage yields historic fidelity, which is every bit as beautiful as the chivalrous
kind. For a married man can never behave thus and, however much the world
goes against him, if he forgets himself even for an instant and begins to feel so
light because despair is about to set him afloat, feel so strong because he has the
numbing drink mixed by defiance and despondency, cowardice and pride, so free
because the bond which binds him to truth and righteousness is, as it were,
loosened, and he now experiences the swiftness which is the transition from
good to evil – still, he will soon turn back to the old paths and as husband
[Aegtemand] prove himself a genuine man [œgte Mand].
That must suffice for these external adversities. I am brief about them because
I feel no special competence to contribute to the subject, and because to do so
properly would require a much fuller treatment. Nevertheless this is the
conclusion I reach: if love can be preserved, and so help me God it can, then the
aesthetic, too, can be preserved; for love itself is the aesthetic.
The further objections are due mainly to a misunderstanding of the meaning of
time and of the aesthetic validity of the historical. They accordingly affect every
marriage and can therefore be discussed in quite general terms. That I shall do
now, and do my best not to overlook, in this generality, the point of the attack
and of the defence.
The first thing you will mention is ‘habit, the unavoidable habit, that fearful
monotony, the perpetual sameness in the dreadful still-life of married
domesticity; nature I love but I’m a hater of second nature’.
33 One must admit
you know how to portray with seductive warmth and sadness the happy time
when one still makes discoveries, to delineate with dread and horror the time
when that is over; you know how to touch in, in laughable and abominable
detail, a marital uniformity not even nature can match, ‘for there, after all, as
Leibniz has already shown, nothing is quite identical; such a uniformity is only
reserved for rational creatures, the fruit either of their drowsiness or their
pedantry’.
34 Now, I have absolutely no mind to deny to you that it is a beautiful
time, an eternally unforgettable time (mark well in what sense I can say this),
when in love’s world the individual is astonished by, and finds bliss in, what
indeed has been discovered long ago, and of which indeed he has often heard
and read, but now first appropriates with all the enthusiasm of surprise, with all
the depth of inwardness. It is a beautiful time, from the very first inkling of love,
the first sight, the first disappearance, of the beloved object, the first chord of
this voice, the first look, the first touch of the hand, the first kiss, right up to the
first complete certainty of possession; it is a beautiful time, the first uneasiness,
the first longing, the first pain because she failed to appear, the first joy because
she came unexpectedly – but that is not at all to say that the sequel is not equally
beautiful. You who imagine you have such a chivalrous way of thinking, test
yourself. When you say the first kiss is the most beautiful, the sweetest, you
insult the loved one, for what gives the kiss absolute value here is time and what
pertains to that.
But if the cause I defend is not to be harmed, you first owe me a small
explanation. For unless you want to proceed in a quite arbitrary manner, you will
have to attack first love in the same way that you attack marriage. For, to survive
in life, it must be exposed to the same calamities, and it will have nothing like
the resources to counter them that married life has in the ethical and the
religious. To be consistent, therefore, you must hate all love which wants to be
an eternal love. You must stop, therefore, with first love by itself. To have its
true meaning, however, first love must have the naive eternity in it. Should that
have ever struck you as an illusion, then you have lost everything, unless you
took pains to succumb to the same illusion once again, which is a contradiction.
Or could it be that your clever head had so conspired with your lust that you
could altogether forget what you owed others? Could it be that you thought that,
even though it could never be repeated like the first time, there was still a
tolerable way out: renewing oneself by experiencing the illusion in others, so
that one savoured the infinitude and novelty in its pristine state in the individual
whose virginal corset of illusion was not yet loosened? That sort of thing betrays
as much desperation as depravity, and since it betrays desperation, it will be
impossible here to find enlightenment about life.
The first thing I must now protest against is your right to use the word ‘habit’
for the recurrence characteristic of every life, and so also of love. ‘Habit’ is used
properly only of what is bad, either through denoting persistence in something
which is in itself bad, or through denoting a repetition of something in itself
innocent but with an obduracy that makes the repetition bad on that account.
‘Habit’ therefore designates something unfree. But just as the good cannot be
performed without freedom, so neither can one stay in it without freedom; thus
with regard to the good one can never talk of habit.
Further, I must also protest when, in portraying marital monotony, you say that
even in nature you will find nothing like it. That is very true, but monotony can
be the very expression of something beautiful, and mankind can to that extent be
proud of being its inventor. Thus in music an even tempo may have much beauty
and great effect.
Finally, I would like to say that if such a monotony were unavoidable in
marital life, then were you honest you would have to realize that the task was to
conquer it, that is, preserve love under it, not to despair. For despair can never be
a task; it is a convenience, but only seized upon, I will admit, by those who see
the task.
But let us now look rather more closely at this notorious monotony. It is your
error, and so too your misfortune, that everywhere, and so also with regard to
love, you think too abstractly. You conceive a small summary of love’s elements;
as you yourself perhaps would say, you conceive the categories of love. In this
respect I willingly concede you an exceptional categorial thoroughness. You
think of everything concrete in terms of an aspect, and this is the poetic way.
Then when you go on to conceive the protractedness of marriage, it seems
dreadfully incongruous to you. The mistake is that you do not think historically.
Were a systematic thinker to conceive the category of interaction, explain it
thoroughly and with sound logic, but then add, ‘it takes an eternity before the
world can be done with all its eternal interaction’, you can hardly deny we would
have a right to laugh at him. It is, after all, the meaning of time, and the lot of
mankind and of individuals, to live in it. So if all you can say is that it is not to
be endured, you will have to look about for another auditorium. Now, this would
be a quite satisfactory answer, but to deprive you of the chance of saying, ‘We
are basically agreed, it’s just that you find it best to put up with what can’t be
altered’, I shall try to show not just that one had better put up with it, as it is
surely a duty, but that putting up with it is in truth the best.
But let us begin at a place which we can assume to be a point of contact. You
are not afraid of the time that precedes the culmination, on the contrary you love
it, and often strive with a multitude of reflections to make the moments longer in
their reproduction than they were originally, and if someone tried to reduce your
life to categories at this point, you would be highly indignant. Nor indeed, in that
time before the culmination, is it just the big, decisive encounters that interest
you, but every little triviality, and you know well enough how to talk of the
secret which was hidden from the wise, that the least is the greatest. On the other
hand, when the point of culmination is reached, why yes, then everything has
changed, everything has shrivelled up into a paltry and unappetizing
abbreviation. This, then, you would have us suppose is based in your nature,
which is merely to conquer but cannot possess. […]
In insisting ‘that’s just how you are’, you admit that others might be different;
more I dare not assert so far, for it might be that you were the normal person,
notwithstanding the anxiousness with which you insist on remaining just as you
are hardly suggests that. But what do you make of others? When you see a
married couple whose union, as it appears to you, drags on in the most fearful
boredom, ‘in the most vapid repetition of love’s holy institutions and
sacraments’, why yes, a destructive fire rages in you, a flame which would
consume them. And this, indeed, is not a piece of capriciousness on your part,
you are in the right, you are justified in letting the lightning of irony strike them,
the thunder of wrath undo them. You annihilate them, indeed, not because that is
your desire, but because they have deserved it. You condemn them. But what
does ‘condemn’ mean, except to demand something of them? And if you cannot
demand it, and it is a contradiction to demand the impossible, then it is a
contradiction to condemn them. You have committed a blunder, have you not?
You have hinted at a law which you yourself will not recognize, and which you
have nevertheless enforced upon others. Still, you are not to be put out, you say,
‘I don’t blame them, I don’t reproach them, I don’t condemn them, I pity them.’
But now suppose the people concerned did not find it boring at all. A selfsatisfied smile springs to your lips, you have surprised yourself with a happy
thought, which might also surprise the one you address: ‘As I said, I pity them;
for either they feel the whole weight of boredom and so I pity them, or they do
not notice it and then, too, I pity them for being subject to such a pitiable
illusion.’ That is about how you would answer me, and were several people
present, your air of assurance would not fail of effect. But now there are none to
hear us, and I can therefore continue the investigation. So you pity them in either
case. Only a third possibility remains, namely that one knows this is how it is
with marriage and, happily, has not entered into it. But clearly this situation is
just as pitiable for the one who has felt love and now sees that it cannot be
realized. And finally, the situation of the person who has helped himself as best
he may out of this shipwreck by the same egoistic makeshift is also pitiable, for
he has set himself up as a robber and troublemaker. It looks, then, as though
marriage itself has become the general expression of a happy ending of
something, so that marriage’s own outcome is not so joyful. Thus general pity is
what we arrive at as the true result of this whole investigation. But such a result
is in itself a contradiction; it is as if a person were to say that the result of life’s
development is that one goes backwards. As a rule you are not afraid of
concessions and perhaps will say here, ‘Yes, it does happen sometimes; when the
wind is dead ahead and the going slippery, then often the result of going forward
can be to go backwards.’
Nevertheless, I return to the consideration of your whole spiritual make-up.
You say that you are by nature a conqueror who cannot possess. In saying this, I
take it you do not think you have said anything disparaging; rather the contrary,
you feel greater than others. Let us examine this a little more closely. What calls
for greater strength, walking uphill or downhill? When the hill is as steep in
either case, obviously the latter calls for more strength. There is an innate
disposition to go uphill in nearly everyone, whereas most people are somewhat
apprehensive about going downhill. Thus, too, I believe far more natures are
formed for conquering than for possessing, and in your feeling of superiority in
relation to large numbers of married people and ‘their stupid brute satisfaction’,
there may indeed be some truth, but you are not willing to learn from your
inferiors either. True art, as a rule, goes in a direction opposite to that of nature,
without therefore annihilating the latter, and thus true art will turn out to possess,
not to conquer, for possession is conquering in reverse. In these expressions you
can see already how art and nature vie with each other. A person who possesses,
yes, he too has something that is conquered; indeed, strictly speaking one can
say that it is only when a person takes possession that he conquers. Now you,
too, believe you possess, for you do indeed have the instant of possession; but it
is no possession, for there is no deeper appropriation. If I were to imagine a
conqueror who had subdued kingdoms and countries, then he would indeed also
possess the provinces he had subdued; he would then have large possessions;
and yet one would describe such a prince as a conqueror, not a possessor. Only
when he ruled those lands wisely in their own best interests, only then would he
possess them. Now this is very rare in someone whose nature it is to conquer; as
a rule he will lack the humility, the religiousness, the true humanity that is
essential to possession. It was, you see, just for this reason that, in explaining the
relationship of marriage to first love, I stressed the religious element because this
will dethrone the conqueror and let the possessor come into view. I therefore
praised the fact that marriage was constructed with the highest in mind: lasting
possession. I can remind you here of a saying you are fond of flourishing: ‘the
great thing isn’t the original but the acquired’; for the urge to conquer, and the
fact that one makes conquests, that is what is really original, while the fact that
he possesses and wants to do that, that is the acquired. To conquer, one needs
pride; to possess, humility. To conquer, one needs to be violent; to possess, to
have patience. To conquer, greed; to possess, contentment; conquering calls for
eating and drinking, possessing for praying and fasting. Yet all the predicates I
have used here, and surely correctly, to characterize the nature of the conqueror
lend themselves to natural man and fit him absolutely; but natural man is not the
highest, for a possession is not a spiritually null and void, even if legally
enforceable, proof of ownership, but a constant acquisition. Here, once more,
you see that the nature of the possessor has in it that of the conqueror, for he
conquers like the countryman, who does not put himself at the head of his men
and drive away his neighbour, but conquers by digging the earth. Thus the truly
great is not to conquer but to possess. […] When conquering, one constantly
forgets oneself, when possessing one remembers oneself; not as an empty
pastime but with all possible seriousness. When going uphill one has only the
other in sight; when going downhill one must watch over oneself, over the
correct relation between the point of support and the centre of gravity. […]
Nature, a philosopher has said,
35
takes the shortest way. One could say it takes
no way at all; it is there all at once, at a stroke; and when I want to lose myself in
contemplation of the vaulted heavens, I do not have to wait until the numberless
heavenly bodies have taken shape, for there they are all at once. The way of
history, like that of justice, is on the contrary very long and hard. Art and poetry
then step in and shorten the way for us and have us rejoice in the moment of
consummation; they concentrate the extensive in the intensive. But the more
significant whatever it is that is to arrive there, the slower the course of history,
but then that much more significance, too, in the course itself, that much more
that which is the goal proves also to be the way. With regard to individual life,
there are two kinds of history, external and internal. These are two kinds of
currents, moving in opposite directions. The first in its turn has two sides. The
individual does not have what he strives for and history is the struggle in which
he acquires it. Or else the individual does have it, but cannot take possession of
it because something outside constantly prevents him from doing so; history is
then the struggle in which he overcomes those obstacles. The second kind of
history starts with the possession, and history is then the development through
which the individual obtains the possession. Now since history in the first case is
external, and what one strives for lies outside, the history is not truly real, and
the poetic and artistic account quite rightly takes steps to shorten it and to hasten
to the intensive moment. […] Only internal history is true history, but true
history struggles with the life-principle in history – with time, but when one
struggles with time, that is exactly when the temporal and every little moment
acquire their great reality. Wherever the inner blossoming of the individual has
not begun, where the individual is still closed, it is a matter of external history.
But as soon as the buds open, so to speak, the inner history begins. Consider
what we began with: the distinction between the natures of the one who
conquers and the one who possesses. The nature of the conqueror is constantly
outside itself, that of the possessor inside itself; so the former has an external
history, the latter an internal. But since external history is the one that lends itself
without detriment to concentration, it is natural for art and poetry to prefer it for
representation, and with it to choose the unopened individual and everything
belonging to him. Love opens the individual, it may be said; but not when love is
understood in the way that it occurs in Romanticism. The individual is brought
only to the point of opening itself, and there one ends; or it is in the process of
opening itself but is interrupted. Yet, just as external history and the closed
individual are the preferred objects of artistic and poetic representation, so too is
everything that makes up the content of such an individual. But that, basically, is
everything that pertains to natural man. Here are a few examples. Pride lends
itself superbly to representation, for what is essential in pride is not succession in
time but intensity in the moment. Humility is hard to represent just because it is
indeed successive, and while the observer need only see pride in its culmination,
so in the case of humility he really requires what poetry and art cannot provide,
to see it in its constant process of becoming, for it is essential to humility that it
is present constantly; and if you show it to him in its idealized moment, he feels
that he misses something, because he feels that its true ideality consists not in
being idealized in the moment but in its being present all the time. Romantic
love lends itself superbly to representation in the moment; not so married love,
for an idealized husband is not a husband once in his life but is that every day. If
I want to represent a hero conquering kingdoms and countries, that lends itself
superbly to representation in the moment; but a cross-bearer who every day takes
up his cross can never be represented, either in poetry or in art, because the point
of it is that he does it every day. If I want to imagine a hero giving his life, that
lends itself superbly to being represented in the moment; but not the risking of
his life every day, because the main thing is that it happens every day. Courage
lends itself superbly to concentration in the moment; not so patience, just
because patience struggles against time. You will say that art, after all, has
represented Christ as an image of patience, as bearing all the world’s sin, that
religious poetry has concentrated all the bitterness of life in one chalice and let
one individual drain it in a single moment. That is true; but it is because it has
been concentrated in an almost spatial way. Anyone moderately informed about
patience, on the other hand, knows very well that its real opposite is not the
intensive moment of suffering (for then it comes closer to courage), but time,
and that true patience is the patience that reveals itself in a struggle against time,
or is really long-suffering. But long-suffering does not lend itself to artistic
representation, for the point of it is incommensurable with art; neither can it be
poetized, for it demands the protractedness of time. […]
In following the development of the aesthetically beautiful, dialectically as
well as historically, one finds that the direction of the movement is from the
category of space to that of time, and that the perfecting of art depends on art’s
being able continually to free itself more and more from space and to define
itself in temporal terms. Herein lies the transition, and the significance of the
transition, from sculpture to painting, as Schelling opportunely indicated. Music
has time as its element but gains no persistency in it; its meaning is persistently
to vanish in time; it sounds but fades at the same time and has no duration.
Poetry, finally, is the most complete of all the arts and therefore that form which
knows best how to do justice to the significance of time. It does not need to
confine itself to the moment in the way painting does, nor vanish without trace
in the way music does. Yet it, too, as we have seen, is obliged nevertheless to
concentrate itself in the moment. So it has its limits, and cannot, as was shown
above, represent something whose very truth is temporal succession. Still, the
fact that justice is done to time detracts in no way from the aesthetic; on the
contrary, the more justice is done to it the richer and fuller the aesthetic ideal
becomes.
But then what about the aesthetic? If it remains incommensurable even with
poetic representation, how can it be represented? Answer: by being lived. In this
way it acquires a certain similarity with music, which is only because it is
constantly repeated, which is only in the moment of performance. That is why I
drew attention in the above to the pernicious conflating of the aesthetic with
what can be presented in the form of poetic reproduction. For, indeed, all that I
am talking about here can be represented aesthetically; not, however, through
poetic reproduction but by one’s living it, realizing it in actual life. This is how
aesthetics transcends itself and reconciles itself with life; for just as poetry and
art are indeed in one sense precisely a reconciliation with life, so in another they
are at enmity with life because they only reconcile one side of the soul.
With this I have reached the highest in the aesthetic. And truly, he who has the
humility and courage to let himself be transfigured aesthetically, he who has a
sense of being a character in the play written by God, a play where the
playwright and prompter are not different people, where the individual, like the
trained actor who has made himself one with his part and his lines, is not put off
by the prompter but feels that what is whispered to him is what he himself would
say, so that he begins almost to doubt whether it is the prompter that is putting
the words into his mouth or he putting them into the prompter’s; he who in the
deepest sense feels himself at once composer and composition, who the instant
he feels himself composing has the original pathos of the line, the instant he
feels himself composed has the erotic ear that picks up every sound; – he, and
only he, has realized the highest in aesthetics. But this history, with which not
even poetry proves to be commensurable, this is the internal history. Internal
history has the idea in itself and is just for that reason aesthetic. So it begins, as I
expressed it, with the possession and its progress is the acquiring of this
possession. It is an eternity in which the temporal has not disappeared as an ideal
factor, but in which it is constantly present as a real one. When patience acquires
itself in this way in patience, it is internal history.
Let us now glance at the relation between romantic and married love, since the
relation between the natures of the conqueror and the possessor cannot offer any
difficulties. In itself romantic love always remains abstract, and if it is not able to
acquire any external history, death already lies in wait for it because its eternity
is illusory. Married love begins with the possession and acquires an internal
history. It is faithful, so too is romantic love, but now see the difference: the
faithful romantic lover can wait, say, for fifteen years, then comes the instant of
his reward. Here, very rightly, poetry says that the fifteen years lend themselves
superbly to concentration, then it hastens to the moment. A husband is faithful
for fifteen years; yet for those fifteen years he has had possession. Accordingly,
throughout that long lapse of time he has constantly acquired the faithfulness he
possessed, since married love has first love within it and thereby its faithfulness.
But an ideal husband of this kind cannot be represented, for the essential thing is
time in its extension. At the end of the fifteen years he has apparently come no
further than at the beginning, and yet he has lived aesthetically in a high degree.
For him his possession has not been a dead property, his possession is something
he has constantly acquired. He has fought, not with lions and ogres, but with that
most dangerous enemy which is time. But here eternity does not come
afterwards as it does for the knight; eternity is something he has had in time,
preserved in time. Only he, therefore, has triumphed over time; for it can be said
of the knight that he has killed time – as indeed a man always wants to kill time
when it has no reality for him – but that is never the real victory. As a true victor,
the husband has not killed time but saved and preserved it in eternity. The
married man that does this, yes, the life of that man is truly poetical, he solves
the great riddle: to live in eternity yet so to hear the parlour clock strike that its
striking does not shorten but prolongs his eternity – a contradiction no less
profound, but far more glorious, than the one contained in that famous situation
in the medieval story of the unfortunate of whom it recounts that he woke up in
hell and shouted, ‘What time is it?’, to which the devil answered, ‘An eternity.’
[…]
Married love, then, has its enemy in time, its victory in time, its eternity in
time; so even were I to imagine all so-called external and internal trials gone, it
would always have its task. The former, as a rule, it also has, but to grasp them
properly one must take note of two things: they are always inward factors, and
they always contain a temporal aspect. For that reason, too, it is easy to see that
love of this kind cannot be represented. It is constantly drawing itself in, and
itself being (in a good sense) drawn along in time, while with anything to be
presented in a reproduction it must be possible to coax it out and shorten its time.
You will be further convinced of this if you consider the predicates applicable to
married love. It is faithful, constant, humble, patient, forbearing, indulgent,
sincere, contented, observant, persistent, willing, joyful. All these virtues have
the property of being inward specifications of the individual. The individual does
not fight external enemies; it is with itself and its love that it fights it out, of its
own accord. And they have a temporal qualification, for their truth consists not
in applying once and for all, but all the time. And nothing else is acquired by
means of these virtues, just the self. Married love is, therefore, at one and the
same time what you have often mockingly called the everyday and also the
divine (in the Greek sense), and it is the divine through being the everyday.
Married love does not come with an external mark, not like the rich bird with a
rush and a roar,
36
it is the incorruptible being of a quiet spirit.
37
Of this, you and all those whose nature it is to conquer have no conception.
You are never within yourselves but constantly outside. Yes, so long as your
every nerve is a-tingle, whether you steal about softly or make yourself known
and the brass band inside you drowns out your consciousness, yes, that is when
you think you are alive. But when the battle is won, when the last echo of the
last shot has died away, when the swift thoughts like orderly officers hasten back
to headquarters to report that the victory is yours – yes, then there is nothing
more you know, you do not know how to begin; for only then do you stand at the
true beginning.
What you despise, therefore, as unavoidable for marriage under the name of
habit, is simply the historical side of it, which to your perverted eye takes on
such a terrifying aspect.
But what is it you are used to regard as not only destroyed, but what is worse,
profaned by the habit inseparably tied to married life? What you think of, in
general, are ‘the visible, holy signs of the erotic, which surely, like all visible
signs, have no meaning in themselves, but whose meaning is due to the energy,
the artistic bravura and virtuosity which is, after all, the natural genius with
which they are executed. How disgusting to see the vapidness with which
everything of that kind is accomplished in married life, how perfunctorily, how
apathetically all that happens, practically on the stroke of the clock, almost like
the tribe the Jesuits came upon in Paraguay who were so apathetic that the
Jesuits found it necessary to have a bell rung at midnight as an agreeable
message to all husbands to remind them of their marital duties. Thus everything
happens in tempo, the way they’ve been trained.’ Let us now agree not to let the
fact that there is much that is ludicrous and absurd in existence put us off in our
observations, but just see whether it is necessary, and if it is, then learn from you
the way of salvation. I dare not expect much from you in this respect, for you
keep on fighting like that Spanish knight,
38
though in another way, for a vanished
time. For, in fighting for the moment against time, you are really fighting all the
time for what has vanished. Let us take an idea, an expression, from your poetic
world, or from the real world of first love: ‘The lovers look at each other.’ This
word ‘look’, how superbly you know how to stretch it out and put an infinite
reality, an eternity into it. A married couple who have lived together for ten years
and seen each other daily cannot look at each other in that sense; but does that
mean they cannot look lovingly at each other? Here we have your old heresy
again. You happen to limit love to a certain age, to limit the love of one person to
a very short time, and then like all those disposed to conquer you recruit for your
experiment. But just that, indeed, is the most profound profanation of the eternal
power of love. It is, in fact, despair. However you turn and twist in it, you must
admit that the task is to preserve love in time. If this is impossible, then love is
an impossibility. Your misfortune is to identify love simply and solely with these
visible signs. If these are to be repeated over and over again and, let it be noted,
with a morbid concern for their constantly having the reality they had by virtue
of the accidental feature of its being their first occurrence, it is no wonder you
are afraid and refer these signs and ‘gesticulations’ to those things of which one
dare not say ‘decies repetitia placebunt’,
39
for if it was the first time that gave
them their value, then a repetition is an impossibility. But healthy love has a
quite different worth; it works itself out in time, and is therefore also capable of
rejuvenating itself through these outward signs; and – what for me is the main
point – it has quite another idea of time and of the meaning of repetition.
I have expanded in the foregoing on how married love has its conflict in time,
its victory in time, its blessing in time. In this I have been taking time to be just
simple progression. But now it will appear that it is not just a simple progression
in which what was there originally is preserved, but a growing progression in
which what was there originally increases. You, who are so observant, will no
doubt concede the generalization that people divide into two large classes, those
who live mainly in hope and those who live mainly in recollection. Both exhibit
an incorrect relation to time. The healthy individual lives in both hope and
recollection, at one and the same time, and it is only through this that his life
acquires true, substantial continuity. Accordingly, he has hope, and unlike those
individuals who live only in recollection, he does not want to go back in time.
But then what does recollection do for him, since it must surely have some
influence? It puts a cross on the note of the instant; the further back recollection
goes, the more frequent the repetition and the more crosses. Thus if he has an
erotic moment in the present year, it is increased by his remembering one in the
previous year, etc. This has come to be beautifully expressed in married life. I do
not know how old the world is now, but you and I both know it is customary to
say that first there came a Golden Age, then a Silver Age, then a Copper Age,
then an Iron Age. In marriage it is the other way round: the silver wedding
comes first and then the golden wedding. Or is recollection really the main point
of such a wedding? But then the marriage terminology declares these other
weddings to be even more beautiful than the first. […] It has often occurred to
me, also, to wonder why, according to ordinary ways of talking and thinking, the
single state has no such prospects, that one tends instead to think it laughable
that a bachelor succeeds in celebrating a jubilee. The reason, no doubt, is that it
is generally assumed that the single state can never grasp the true present, which
is a unity of hope and recollection, and therefore tends either to lie in hope or in
recollection. But this, again, suggests the correct relation to the present that
married love has in the popular mind.
However, there is something else in married life that you also indicate with the
word ‘habit’. ‘Its uniformity, its total uneventfulness, its incessant vacuity, which
is death and worse than death.’ You know there are neurasthenics who are
disturbed by the slightest noise, who are unable to think when someone walks
softly over the floor. Have you noticed that there is also another kind of
neurasthenia? There are people so weak that they need proper noise and
distracting surroundings to be able to work. Why if not because they have no
command over themselves, only in an inverse sense? When they are alone, their
thoughts disappear in the indefinite; on the other hand, when noise and hubbub
surround them, this compels them to pit their will against it. It is only when you
have opposition that you are within yourself, but then, really, you are never
within but constantly outside yourself. The moment you assimilate the
opposition, there is quiet once more; so that is something you dare not do. But
then you and the opposition are standing facing each other, and so you are not
within yourself.
Naturally, the same applies here as before with time. You are outside yourself
and therefore you cannot do without the other’s opposition. You believe that
only a restless spirit is alive, while all men of experience think only a quiet spirit
truly lives. For you a turbulent sea is a picture of life, for me the still, deep water.
I have often sat beside a small stretch of flowing water. It is always the same, the
same soft melody, the verdure on its bed, swaying beneath its tranquil waves, the
same small creatures moving about down there, a little fish which glides in under
the cover of the flowers, it spreads its fins against the stream, it hides beneath a
stone. How uniform, and yet how rich in change! Thus is married domesticity,
quiet, modest, murmuring; not many changements, and yet, like that water, it is
flowing, like that water it has melody, dear to the one that knows it, dear to him
just because he knows it. It is without pomp, and yet a lustre sometimes spreads
over it though without interrupting its habitual course, just as when moonbeams
fall upon that water and reveal the instrument upon which it plays its melody.
Such is married domesticity. But to be seen thus and live thus presupposes a
property I shall now mention to you. There is a verse of Oehlenschläger’s which
I know you at least used to set great store by. For the sake of completeness, I
transcribe it:
Yet how much must cohere in the world,
To conjure forth true love!
First: two hearts which each other know,
Then grace, their attendant guide;
Then the moon with its beam downcast
Through the branching beech in spring;
So they can meet alone –
Then the kiss – and then, too, innocence.
You, too, are in the business of eulogizing love. I will not deprive you of
what, indeed, is not yours to own since it belongs to the poet, but of what you
have nevertheless appropriated; yet since I, too, have appropriated it, let us be
sharers – you get the whole verse, I the last word: and then, too, innocence.
Finally, there is yet another side to married life that has often given you
occasion for attack. You say: ‘Married love conceals in itself something quite
different; it seems so mild and lovely and tender but once the door is closed
behind the married couple, and before you know what, out comes the cane and
we are told it’s a duty. Deck out this sceptre as much as you may, make it into a
Shrove-tide rod, it is still just a cane.’ I deal with this objection here because
essentially it, too, is due to a misunderstanding of the historical aspect of married
love. You would have either dark powers or mood to be the constituent factors of
love. As soon as consciousness joins in, the enchantment vanishes. But married
love has that consciousness. To put it crudely, in place of the conductor’s baton,
whose movements provide the tempo for the graceful postures of first love, you
show us the disagreeable corporal’s cane of duty. You have to admit, first of all,
that as long as there is no change in the first love which, as we were agreed,
married love contains, there can be no question of the strict necessity of duty. So
you do not really believe in the eternity of first love. Look, here we have your
old heresy again. After all, it is you who set yourself up so often as first love’s
knight, and yet you do not believe in it, yes, you profane it. Not believing in it,
you dare not enter into an alliance which, when you are no longer volens, can
compel you nolens to stay in it. For you, then, love is clearly not the highest
thing; for otherwise you would be happy if there were a power capable of
compelling you to stay in it. You may say that such an expedient is no expedient;
but to that I will remark that it depends on how you look at it. […]
You regard duty as the enemy of love, I regard it as its friend. That assertion
may satisfy you, and with your usual mockery you will congratulate me on such
an interesting and no less unusual friend. I, for my part, will by no means be
satisfied with that, but take the liberty of carrying the war over into your own
territory. If duty, once apparent to consciousness, is the enemy of love, then love
must look to defeating it; for after all, you would not have it that love was so
impotent a being as not to be able to overcome all opposition. On the other hand,
you think that when duty comes into view it’s all over with love, and also that
sooner or later duty does have to come into view, not just in married love but
also in romantic love. And really you fear married love because there duty is so
much part of it that when it becomes visible you cannot run away from it. Yet
you think that is quite all right in the case of romantic love, for the very instant
duty is mentioned the love is over, and duty’s arrival is the signal for you – with
a very polite bow – to take your leave, or, as you once put it, for you to regard it
as your duty to take your leave. Here, again, you see how it goes with your
eulogizing of love. If duty is the enemy of love, and love cannot defeat this
enemy, then love is not the true victor. What follows is that you must leave love
in the lurch. Once you have got hold of the despairing notion that duty is the
enemy of love, then your defeat is assured and you have disparaged love and
divested it of its majesty, just as you have done with duty, and yet that was the
last thing you wanted. You see, this is despair once more, and it’s that whether
you feel the pain of it or try, in despair, to forget it. If you cannot reach the point
of seeing the aesthetic, the ethical, the religious as the three great allies, if you do
not know how to preserve the unity of the different expressions everything
acquires within these different spheres, then life is without meaning and you
must be accounted fully justified in your pet theory that one can say of
everything: do it or do not do it, you will regret both.
Now, unlike you, I am not under the tragic necessity of having to mount an
always unsuccessful campaign against duty. Duty is not for me one climate and
love another; duty makes my love into the true, temperate climate, and
perfection is this unity. However, in order properly to reveal to you your false
doctrine, I will pursue it a little further, begging you to ponder the different ways
in which one might feel that duty was the enemy of love.
Imagine someone who has become a husband without ever properly taking into
account the ethical factor in marriage. He loves with all the ardour of youth, and
is then suddenly, through some outward circumstance, affected by doubt as to
whether the one he loves, and to whom he is also bound by ties of duty, might
not think that really he only loves her because it is his duty. His case, indeed, is
similar to the one indicated above; it seems to him, too, that duty turns out to be
opposed to love. But he loves, and for him his love is truly the highest thing, and
accordingly his efforts are directed at defeating this enemy. That is, he wants to
love her, not because that is what duty enjoins – not according to the poor
measure for the necessary minimum duty can yield – no, he wants to love her
with all his soul, all his might, and all his fortune. He wants to love her even at
the moment, should this be possible, when duty allowed him to refrain. You can
easily see the confusion in his train of thought. What does he do? He loves her
with all his soul; but that is exactly what duty enjoins, for let us not be confused
by the talk of those who think that duty in respect of love is merely a catalogue
of rules of etiquette. Duty here is just one thing, truly to love, with the sincerity
of the heart, and duty is as protean as love itself, declaring everything holy and
good when it is of love, and denouncing everything, however pleasing and
specious, when it is not of love. So you see, he too has taken an incorrect
attitude; but just because there is truth in him, he does what duty enjoins – seeing
it is not just what he wants to do – neither more nor less than what duty enjoins.
The ‘more’ he does is really his doing it; for the ‘more’ that I can do is always
that I can do what duty enjoins. Duty enjoins, it cannot do more. The ‘more’ I am
capable of is doing what it enjoins, and the moment I do that I can say that, in a
sense, I am doing ‘more’; I translate the duty from the external to the internal
and thereby go beyond duty. From this you see what infinite harmony and
wisdom and consistency there is in the world of spirit. When one proceeds from
a definite position and quite calmly pursues it with truth and energy, it must
always be an illusion when all the rest seems to be in contradiction with it; and
when someone believes he effectively demonstrates the disharmony, he
demonstrates the harmony. So the husband we have been talking of came out of
it well; really his only punishment was that the duty teased him a little for his
‘little faith’. Duty constantly chimes in with love. If you separate them, as he
did, and make one part into the whole, then you are in constant selfcontradiction. It is as if one were to separate the ‘t’ and the ‘e’ in the syllable ‘te’,
and then want no ‘e’ but claim the ‘t’ is all there is to it. The moment he says it,
he says the ‘e’ too. So it is with true love. It is not something speechless,
abstractly inexpressible, but neither is it something soft, ungraspably indefinite.
It is an articulate sound, a syllable. If duty is hard, eh bien, then love enunciates
that fact, it makes it real, and thereby does more than its duty; if love is on the
point of becoming so soft that it cannot be kept hold of, then duty sets a limit to
it.
Now, if that was what your view that duty is the enemy of love amounted to, if
it was nothing but an innocent misunderstanding, then, why yes, your case
would be much as that of the man we are discussing. But much as your grasp of
the matter is indeed a misunderstanding, it is also a culpable misunderstanding.
Hence you disparage not just duty but love; hence duty looks as though it were
an insuperable enemy. That is because it is true love that duty loves and it has a
mortal hatred of false love, yes, it kills it. If they are in the truth, the individuals
will see in duty merely the eternal expression of the fact that the way is prepared
for them in eternity, that the way they would gladly go is one along which they
are not merely permitted to proceed, indeed they are enjoined to do so. And over
that path there watches a divine providence which is constantly showing them
the way ahead, putting protective shields at all the dangerous places. And for a
person who truly loves, why should he be unwilling to accept a divine
authorization just because it expresses itself divinely, and says not merely ‘you
may’ but ‘you must’? In duty, everything is put in order for the lovers, and that, I
believe, is why the language of duty is in the future tense, to suggest the
historical aspect.
Now I am through with this little exposition. Presumably, though, it has made
an impression upon you; you feel that everything has been turned around, and
you cannot quite harden yourself to the logical rigour of my remarks.
Nevertheless, if I had said all this to you in conversation, you would have found
it hard not to offer the sarcastic comment that I am ‘preaching’. However, you
cannot justly accuse my presentation of suffering from that defect, or of being
perhaps just as it ought, when one talks to a sinner as hardened as you; and as for
your own lecturings and wisdom, these not infrequently remind one of the
Preacher’s Book,
40 and indeed one might believe you occasionally chose your
texts from that source.
But I will let you yourself provide me with an opportunity to illuminate this
matter. For as a rule you do not allow people to scoff at ethics, and in fact one
has to force you to a certain point before you jettison it. You always keep it on
your own side as long as you possibly can. ‘I don’t by any means despise duty’,
that is how the more moderate lectures, the more refined assassinations of duty,
begin: ‘far be it from me, but above all let’s keep our consciences clean, duty is
duty, love is love, period! and above all, no mishmash. But isn’t it the case that
marriage is alone in being a monstrosity of that kind, with this hermaphroditic
ambiguity? All else is either duty or love. I recognize it is a person’s duty to seek
a definite position in life, I regard it as his duty to be true to his calling, while if
he violates his duty, on the other hand, he well deserves the punishment he
suffers. This is duty. I make some definite undertaking, I can state precisely what
it is I promise dutifully to comply with. If I do not do that, I am confronted by a
power which can compel me. If I form an intimate attachment to another person,
on the other hand, love is everything, I acknowledge no duty. If the love is over,
we are through with the friendship. It is reserved exclusively for marriage to
base itself on such an absurdity. What does it mean, after all, to pledge oneself to
love? Where is the boundary? When have I discharged my duty? How is my
duty to be more precisely defined? To what tribunal can I appeal in cases of
doubt? And if I fail to discharge my duty, where is the power to compel me?
Certainly, the State and the Church have established a certain limit; but may I not
still be a bad husband even if I don’t overstep it? Who will punish me, who will
defend her who suffers under this?’ Answer: you yourself. [To resolve] the
confusion in which you have ensnared both yourself and me […] [let] us take a
look at your classification. […] You think that everything else can be grasped
under either the category of duty or its opposite, and that it has never occurred to
anyone to apply another criterion: marriage alone is guilty of this selfcontradiction. You offer the duty of one’s calling as an example and think it an
apt illustration of a purely dutiful relationship. This, however, is by no means the
case. For if a person simply conceived of his occupation as a sum of
appointments he had to keep at definite times and places, he would be degrading
himself, his calling and his duty. Or perhaps you think a point of view like that
would make for a good official? Where, then, would there be room for the
enthusiasm with which one hallows one’s calling, where room for the devotion
with which one loves it? What forum could keep an eye on these? Or perhaps
such things are not required of him as part of his duty? But then would the State
not look upon anyone who assumed office without them as a hireling, whose
sweat and toil it could exploit and reward, but who in another sense was an
unworthy official? If the State does not say so in so many words, that is because
what it demands is something outward, something tangible, and when it gets that
it presupposes the other. In marriage, on the other hand, the main thing is what is
inward, what cannot be pointed at. Yet the precise expression of this is love. I see
no contradiction, therefore, in requiring it as a duty; for the fact that there is no
one to keep an eye on it is not to the point, seeing the man can, after all, always
keep an eye on himself. Should you continue, therefore, to demand such a check,
it is either because you want it to help you worm your way out of your duty, or
because you are so afraid of yourself that you would gladly have yourself
declared legally incompetent; but that is just as wrong and just as reprehensible.
If you bear in mind what I have explained in the foregoing, in the way I have
explained it, you will easily perceive that my insisting on the inwardness of duty
in love is not done with the hullabaloo one occasionally finds with people whose
prosaic common sense has first destroyed the immediate and who now, in old
age, have taken to duty; people who, in their blindness, cannot voice their scorn
of the purely natural in strong enough terms, nor sing their praises of duty
stupidly enough – as though, in this way, it were something different from what
you call it. Such a rupture, thank God, is unknown to me. I have not run off with
my love into trackless regions and deserts where, in my loneliness, I lose my
way, nor exactly have I asked my neighbours and the people across the way for
their advice on what I should do. Such isolation and such particularization are
equally wrong. I have always had footprints before me in this very region of
universal validity which is duty. I have also felt that there are moments when the
only salvation is to let duty speak, that it is healthy to let it punish one, not with
the dismal effeminacy of a heautontimoroumenos,
41 but in all seriousness and
emphatically. But I have not been afraid of duty, it has not appeared before me as
an enemy which wanted to disturb the crumb of joy and happiness I had hoped
to preserve through life; it has appeared as a friend, our love’s first and only
confidant. But this strength of having the prospect always free, that is the
blessing of duty, while romantic love, because of its non-historical character,
goes astray or comes to a standstill.
Dixi et animam meant liberavi,
42 not as if my soul had hitherto been trapped
and now in this prolix unburdening had got itself air; no, it is merely a healthy
drawing of breath in which it has savoured its freedom. Drawing breath in Latin
is called respiratio, a word which indicates a flowing back of what had first
flowed out. In drawing breath the organism enjoys its freedom, the freedom I
have every day.
Accept now, well prepared, what is offered to you, well tested. Should you find
it all too little to satisfy you, then see if you cannot prepare yourself better,
whether you have not forgotten some precaution or other. The Serbs have a
legend which tells of an immense giant with an equally immense appetite.
43 He
comes to a poor cottager and wants to share the latter’s dinner. The cottager puts
out what the humble resources of the house afford. The giant’s greedy eyes have
already devoured it all, and he no doubt reckoned he would be no nearer having
his fill had he actually eaten it. They sit down to the table. It does not occur to
the cottager that there might not be enough for both. The giant reaches for the
dish. The cottager stops him with the words: ‘It is the custom in my house first
to say a prayer’; the giant complies, and behold! there is enough for them both.
Dixi et animam meam liberavi; for her also, whom I still love, constantly, with
the youthfulness of first love, her too have I liberated, not as if she had
previously been bound, but she has rejoiced with me in our freedom.
In accepting my loving greeting, accept, too, as usual, a greeting from her,
friendly and sincere as always.
It is a long time since I have seen you in our home. I can say this both in a true
and a figurative sense; for notwithstanding the fortnight of evenings I have
devoted almost entirely to this letter, I have constantly had you with me in a way,
and yet I have not, in the figurative sense, really had you in my home, not in my
house, in my living-room, but outside my door, from which, with my reproaches,
it is almost as though I have been trying to drive you away. For me this has not
been an agreeable way of passing the time, nor will you, I know, take my
behaviour amiss. However, it will always be, both truly and figuratively, still
more agreeable to me to see you in our home both truly and figuratively. I say
this with all the husbandly pride of one who feels qualified to use that formula:
in our home. I say it with all the humane respect every individual ‘in our home’
can always be certain of receiving. For next Sunday, then – you receive no
standing family invitation ‘for ever’, i.e. for a whole day. Come when you want
– always welcome; stay as long as you want – always the agreeable guest; go
when you want – always well commended.
2 EQUILIBRIUM BETWEEN THE AESTHETIC
AND THE ETHICAL IN THE DEVELOPMENT
OF PERSONALITY
My friend!
What I have said to you so often I say once more, or rather I shout it to you:
either/or; aut/aut. A single aut offered as a caution does not make matters clear,
since the question here is too important for one to be satisfied with a part and too
internally consistent not to be grasped in the whole. There are situations in life to
which it would be ridiculous, or a kind of insanity, to apply an either/or; but also,
there are people whose souls are too disjointed to grasp what such a dilemma
implies, whose personalities lack the energy to be able to say with feeling:
either/or. These words have always made a strong impression on me and they
still do, especially when I mention them by themselves in this way and out of
context; the most frightful conflicts can now be set in motion. Their effect on me
is that of an incantation; I become exceedingly serious, sometimes well-nigh
shaken. I think back to an early youth when, without properly grasping what it
means to make a choice in life, I listened with childlike trust to the talk of my
elders and for me the moment of choice became solemn and august,
notwithstanding that in choosing I was only following another’s instructions. I
think of the moment when, later in life, I stood at the crossroads, when my soul
was matured in the hour of decision. I think of the many less important, yet for
me not indifferent, occasions in life where choice was what mattered. For
although there is only one situation where this phrase has its absolute meaning,
namely where it points on the one hand to truth, righteousness, and holiness, and
on the other to desire and susceptibility, and to dim passions and perdition, it is
important to choose rightly even when the choice in itself is harmless; to test
oneself so as never to have to begin a retreat to the point one started out from,
and thank God for having nothing worse to reproach oneself for than wasting
time. I use these words in daily speech as others use them, and it would be
foolish pedantry to stop doing so; but there can be times when I catch myself
having used them of things that are altogether indifferent. They then take off
their humble attire. I forget the insignificant thoughts they disjoin, they appear to
me in all their dignity, in their robes. Just as in everyday affairs an official
appears in civilian clothes and mingles with the crowd unremarked, so too with
those words in everyday speech; for when instead he appears in authority he sets
himself apart from everyone else. Like an official of that kind whom I see
usually only on solemn occasions, these words appear before me and my soul
always becomes serious. And although to some extent my life has its either/or
behind it, I know very well that there may still be many a situation, in which its
full meaning is yet to be encountered. I hope, however, that these words may at
least find me in a worthy state of mind when they make me pause on my way,
and that I shall succeed in choosing the right course. But I shall strive in any
case to choose with unfeigned seriousness, and then at least I shall dare to
comfort myself that I shall return all the sooner to the right path.
And now for you – you certainly use this phrase often enough, indeed with you
it has almost become a byword – what does it mean to you? Nothing at all. For
you it is, according to your own expressions, a twinkling of the eye, a snap of the
fingers, a coup de main, an abracadabra. You can produce it at every opportunity,
nor without effect. Its effect on you is that of a strong drink on a neurasthenic.
You become totally intoxicated in what you yourself call the higher lunacy. ‘In it
is contained all life’s wisdom, but never has anyone expounded it so pithily – as
if a god in the guise of a bogle were talking to suffering humanity – as that great
thinker and true philosopher of life, who said to a man who had tossed his hat
onto the floor. “If you pick it up, you’ll get a beating, if you don’t pick it up
you’ll also get a beating, now you can choose!”’ You take great delight in
‘comforting’ people when they appeal to you in moments of crisis. You listen to
their explanations and then say, ‘Yes, I see quite plainly now, there are two
possibilities, one can either do it or not do it; my honest opinion and my friendly
advice is as follows: do it or don’t do it, you will regret both.’ But he who mocks
others mocks himself, and it is not a trivial matter but a deep mockery of
yourself, a sad proof of how loose the joints of your soul are, that your view of
life focuses on a single sentence, ‘I say merely either/or.’ If you were really
serious there would be nothing to be done with you; one would have to put up
with you as you were and regret that melancholy or frivolity had weakened your
mind. Since, however, one knows very well that that isn’t the case, it is tempting
not to pity you but to wish, indeed, that the circumstances of your life may some
day strap you on their rack and force you to come out with what really dwells
within you, that the more rigorous examination that is not satisfied with talk and
witticisms should begin. Life is a masquerade, you tell us, and this, for you, is an
inexhaustible source of amusement, yet still no one has succeeded in knowing
you; for all your revelations are constantly illusions; that is the only way you can
breathe and make sure people do not press in on you and prevent you drawing
breath. Your activity is designed to keep yourself hidden, and in that you
succeed, your own mask is the most enigmatic of all; for you are nothing and
exist merely in relation to others, and you are what you are in this relation. To an
affectionate shepherdess you languidly offer a hand and, instantly, are masked in
every kind of pastoral sentimentality; you deceive a venerable spiritual father
with a fraternal kiss, etc. You yourself are nothing, an enigmatic figure, on
whose brow is written ‘either/or’ – ‘for that is my slogan, and these words are
not, as grammarians think, disjunctive conjunctions; no, they belong inseparably
together and should therefore be written as one word, seeing that together they
form an interjection which I shout at mankind, as one shouts “Hip” at a Jew’.
1
Now although nothing you say in this vein has any effect upon me, or if it does,
the most it can do is provoke a righteous indignation, nevertheless for your own
sake I will answer you. Don’t you know that a midnight hour comes when
everyone has to take off his mask? Do you think life always lets itself be trifled
with? Do you think you can sneak off a little before midnight to escape this?
And does it not dismay you? I have seen people in real life who deceived others
for so long that in the end their true nature could not reveal itself; I have seen
people play hide-and-seek for so long that finally, through them, madness forced
their secret thoughts upon others as distastefully as hitherto they had proudly
kept them to themselves. Or can you imagine anything more frightful than that it
might end with your nature dissolving into a multitude, with your really
becoming many, becoming, like that unhappy demoniac, a legion,
2 and in that
way losing the innermost, the most holy thing in a man, the unifying power of
personality? Truly, you should not trifle with what is not only serious but
terrifying. There is, in every person, something which to some degree prevents
him from being completely transparent to himself; and this can be on such a
scale that he is so inexplicably woven into the circumstances of life which lie
outside him that he is almost unable to reveal himself. But he who cannot reveal
himself cannot love, and he who cannot love is the unhappiest of all. And you do
the same wantonly, you train yourself in the art of being a riddle to everyone. My
young friend! what if no one bothered to guess your riddle? What pleasure
would you get out of it then? But, first of all for your own sake, for the sake of
your salvation – for I know of no state of the soul that better deserves to be
called perdition – stop this wild flight, this passion for destruction, which rages
in you; for that is what you want to do, you want to destroy everything; you want
to sate the hunger of doubt upon life. It is to this end that you cultivate yourself.
It is for this that you steel your mind. For this much you gladly admit, that you
are good for nothing, that all that gives you pleasure is marching seven times
round life and blowing on the horn,
3 and then letting the whole thing come
tumbling down so that your soul may find peace, yes, sad that you are able to
summon forth Echo, for Echo is heard only in emptiness.
However, I doubt if I can make any progress with you in this direction;
besides, my head is, if you like, too weak to put up with, or as I prefer it, too
strong to find pleasure in, things constantly swirling before my eyes. So I shall
start from another angle. Imagine a young man at an age when life really begins
to have meaning; he is healthy, pure, joyful, mentally gifted, full of hope and
himself the hope of all who know him; imagine that, yes, it’s hard to say this –
imagine that he was mistaken about you, that he believed you were a serious,
tried and experienced person, in whom one could safely seek enlightenment on
life’s riddles; imagine that he appealed to you with that endearing trust which is
the ornament of youth, with that ungainsayable right of claim that is the privilege
of youth – how would you answer him? Would you answer, ‘Yes, I say only
either/or’? Hardly. Would you, as you are wont to put it when you want to
indicate your disgust at others’ inconveniencing you with their personal
problems, stick your head out of the window and say, ‘Try next door’? Or would
you treat him like others who wish to seek advice or enlightenment from you,
whom you dismiss as you would those who come for the priest’s offering, with
the words that you are ‘only a lodger in life’, not a householder and
paterfamilias? You wouldn’t do that either. A young person, mentally gifted, is
something you set too much store by. Yet your relation to him would not be quite
as you wished, it wasn’t an accidental encounter that had brought you into
contact with him; your irony was not tempted. Although he was the younger one,
you the older, still, with his noble youthfulness he had made the moment serious.
You yourself would like to be young, would you not? To feel that there is
something beautiful in being young yet also something very serious, that it is by
no means a matter of indifference how one uses one’s youth, that one has a
choice, a real either/or. You would feel that what is important is not so much
cultivating his mind as maturing his personality. Your good nature, your
sympathy would be set in motion; it is from this that you would speak to him;
you would invigorate his soul, confirm his trust in the world, you would assure
him that there is a power in a man which is able to defy the whole world, you
would impress very strongly upon him the importance of making good use of
time. You can do all this, and when you want to, you can do it handsomely. But
mark well what I am going to say to you, young man – for although you are not
young, one is always obliged to call you that. What was it you did here? You
acknowledged what you otherwise will not acknowledge, the importance of
either/or. And why? Because your soul was moved by love for the young man;
and yet you deceived him in a way, for it may be that he wants to meet you on
other occasions when it is not at all convenient to make this acknowledgement.
Here you see a sorry consequence of the inability of a man’s nature to reveal
itself harmoniously. You thought you were doing what was best, and yet you
may have caused him injury; perhaps he would have held out better if confronted
with your distrust of life than by finding comfort in the subjective, deceitful trust
you imparted to him. Now imagine you met that young man again after a lapse
of several years. He was lively, witty, active in thought, bold in expression; but
your refined ear could easily detect the doubt in his soul, you formed a suspicion
that he, too, had arrived at the questionable wisdom. ‘I say only either/or’. You
would be sorry for him, would you not? You would feel he had lost something,
and something essential. But you would not feel sorry for yourself; you are
satisfied, indeed you are proud of your questionable wisdom, yes, so proud of it
that you cannot let another share in it, you want it for yourself. And yet in
another respect you find it deplorable, and it is your sincere opinion that it is to
be deplored that this young man has arrived at the same wisdom. What a
monstrous contradiction! Your whole nature is in contradiction with itself. But
you can only get out of this contradiction with an either/or; and I, who love you
more genuinely than you loved that young man, who have experienced in my life
the importance of choice, congratulate you on still being young enough, even if
there will always be something you miss, young enough, if you have the energy
(or rather if you want to have it), to win what is the main thing in life: to win
yourself, to take possession of yourself.
Now, if a man could constantly balance on the tip of the moment of choice, if
he could stop being a person, if in his inmost being he were only an empty
thought, if personality meant no more than to be a goblin which, while going
through the motions, remained nevertheless unchanged, if that is how it was, it
would be foolish to say it might be too late for a man to choose, for in a deeper
sense there could be no question of a choice. Choice itself is decisive for a
personality’s content; in choice personality immerses itself in what is chosen,
and when it does not choose it wastes consumptively away. For a moment it can
seem, for a moment it can look as if what the choice is between lies outside the
chooser; he has no relation to it, he can sustain an indifference in the face of it.
This is the instant of deliberation, but like the Platonic instant, it really has no
existence,
4
least of all in the abstract sense in which you would hold on to it.
And the longer one stares at it the less it exists. What is to be chosen stands in
the deepest relationship to the chooser, and when the choice concerns a problem
of life the individual must naturally go on living at the same time; so the longer
he postpones the choice the easier it is to modify it, even though he keeps on
deliberating and deliberating and thinks, because of that, that he is holding the
alternatives properly apart from one another. When one looks at life’s either/or in
this way, one is not easily tempted to trifle with it. One sees, then, that the inner
activity of the personality has no time for thought-experiments, that it hastens
constantly on and in one way or another is positing either the one or the other,
making the choice in the next instant more difficult because what has been
posited has to be retracted. If you imagine a helmsman in his ship when it is just
about to tack, then he may be able to say, ‘I can either do this or that’, but unless
he is a pretty poor helmsman he will also be aware that the ship is still
maintaining its normal headway, and so there is only an instant when it is
immaterial whether he does this or that. Similarly with a human being; if he
forgets to take that headway into account, the moment eventually comes when
there is no longer any question of an either/or, not because he has chosen but
because he has refrained from choice, which can also be expressed in another
way: because others have chosen for him, because he has lost himself.
You will also see from this why my view of a choice differs from yours, in the
event that I can speak of your having such, for the difference is precisely that
yours prevents a choice. The moment of choice is for me very serious, less on
account of the rigorous pondering of the alternatives, and of the multitude of
thoughts that attach to each separate link, than because there is a danger afoot
that at the next moment it may not be in my power to make the same choice, that
something has already been lived that must be lived over again. For it is a
delusion to think one can keep one’s personality blank, or that one can in any
real sense arrest and interrupt personal life. The personality already has interest
in the choice before one chooses, and if one postpones the choice the personality
makes the choice unconsciously, or it is made by the dark powers within it. Then
when at last the choice is made, if, as I remarked earlier, one has not gone into
complete dissolution, one discovers that there is something that must be done
over again, that must be retracted, and that is often very difficult. Fairy-tales tell
us of human beings whom mermaids and mermen captivated with their demonic
music. To break the spell, says the story, they had to play the same piece
backwards without a single mistake.
5 The thought here is very profound but very
difficult to put into action, and yet it is so; the errors one has incurred must be
eliminated in this way, and every time a mistake is made one must make a fresh
start. See, then, how important it is to choose and to choose in time. You,
however, have another method – for I know full well that the polemical side you
expose to the world is not your true nature. Yes, if deliberation were the task for
a human life you would be close to perfection. I will take an example. To
encompass your case the alternatives will naturally have to be bold ones; either
priest/or actor. Here is the dilemma. All your passionate energy now awakens;
reflection with its hundred arms grasps the thought of being a priest. There is no
peace for you, day and night you think about it; you read all the publications you
can lay your hands on, go to church three times every Sunday, make the
acquaintance of priests, write sermons yourself, deliver them to yourself; for half
a year you are dead to the whole world. Then you are ready. You are now able to
talk with more insight, and as if you had greater clerical experience, than many
who have been priests for twenty years. Your indignation is aroused when you
meet with such people because they cannot unburden their hearts with greater
eloquence. ‘Is this enthusiasm?’ you say, ‘I who am not a priest, who am not
dedicated to that calling – compared with them I speak with the voice of angels.’
And that could well be true, but you have not become a priest. Then you proceed
in the same manner with the other problem, and your enthusiasm for art almost
outdoes your ecclesiastic eloquence. Now you are ready for the choice.
However, one may be sure that, in the immense activity of thought you have
been engaged in, much has gone to waste, many small comments and
observations. So just when you are to make the choice, this refuse begins to
come to life, a new either/or presents itself: lawyer; or perhaps barrister, for that
has something in common with both of the alternatives. Now you are done for.
For at that moment you are, without further ado, barrister enough to be able to
show the propriety of taking the third possibility into account. So your life goes
on. After a year and a half wasted on these deliberations, having exerted with
admirable energy all the strength of your soul, you have come not one step
further. Then the thread of thought snaps, you become impatient, passionate, you
ravage with sword and fire, and then you go on, ‘Or a hairdresser, or a bank
teller, I say only either/or.’ Little wonder, then, that for you this phrase has
become ‘a stumbling-block and a foolishness’,
6
that to you it seems ‘like the
arms of the iron maiden whose embrace is death’. You look down on people.
You make a mockery of them, and you have become what you despise most of
all – a critic, a universal critic in all departments. At times I can hardly forbear
smiling at you, and yet it is sad that your truly excellent intellectual gifts are
dissipated in this way. But here again we have that same contradiction in your
nature. For you see the ludicrous very clearly, and God help the one who falls
into your hands if he is in a similar case; yet the only difference is that while he
may be dejected and broken, you become cheerful and erect and livelier than
ever, beatifying yourself and others with the gospel:
7 vanitas vanitatum vanitas,
hurrah! But that is no choice, it is a case of ‘Drop it!’,
8 or a mediation, like
letting five become an even number. You now feel free, you bid the world
farewell:
Thus I retire into the back of beyond
Above my cap only stars.
9
There, now you have chosen – not indeed the better part, that you will agree;
but really you have made no choice at all, or you have chosen only figuratively.
Your choice is an aesthetic choice, but an aesthetic choice is no choice. In
general, the act of choosing is a literal and strict expression of the ethical.
Wherever it is a matter of an either/or in a stricter sense, one can always be sure
that the ethical is involved. The only absolute either/or there is is the choice
between good and evil, but it is also absolutely ethical. The aesthetic choice is
either wholly immediate, thus no choice, or it loses itself in multiplicity. Thus if
a young girl follows the choice of her heart, this choice, however beautiful, is
not a choice in the stricter sense since it is wholly immediate. A person who
aesthetically considers a whole range of life-tasks, like you in the above, is more
likely to arrive at a multiplicity than an either/or, because here the factor of selfdetermination in the choice is not given an ethical emphasis, and because, if one
does not choose absolutely, one chooses for that moment only and can, for that
reason, choose something else the next instant. The ethical choice is therefore in
a certain sense far easier, far simpler, but in another sense infinitely more
difficult. A person who wants to determine himself ethically in his life’s task has
usually an insignificant selection to choose from; on the other hand, the act of
choice itself signifies far more for him. If you will understand me aright, I could
quite well say that in choice it is less a matter of choosing correctly than of the
energy, earnest and feeling with which one chooses. The personality thereby
proclaims itself in its inner infinitude, and the personality is thereby consolidated
in turn. So even if a person chose what was wrong, he would still, because of the
energy with which he chose it, discover that what he had chosen was wrong. For
inasmuch as the choice is undertaken with all the personality’s inwardness, his
nature is purified and he himself is brought into immediate relation to the eternal
power whose omnipresence interpenetrates the whole of existence. This
transfiguration, this higher initiation, is never discovered by someone who
chooses merely aesthetically. The rhythm in his soul, despite all its passion, is
only a spiritus lenis.
10
[…]
What is it, then, that I separate in my either/or? Is it good and evil? No, I
simply want to bring you to the point where that choice truly acquires meaning
for you. It is on this that everything hinges. Only when one can get a person to
stand at the crossroads in such a way that he has no expedient but to choose,
does he choose what is right. So if you should happen, before you have a chance
to read the whole of this somewhat lengthy inquiry, which again is being sent to
you in the form of a letter, if you should happen to feel that the moment of the
choice has come, throw away the rest, do not bother with it at all, you have not
lost anything – but choose, and you shall see what validity there is in it; yes, no
young girl can be as happy in the choice of her heart as a man who has known
how to choose. Either, then, one is to live aesthetically or one is to live ethically.
In this, as I have said, there is no question yet of a choice in a stricter sense; for
someone who lives aesthetically does not choose, and someone who, once the
ethical has become apparent to him, chooses the aesthetic, does not live in the
aesthetic sphere for he sins and comes under the category of the ethical, even if
his life must be described as unethical. […]
My either/or does not denote in the first instance the choice between good and
evil, it denotes the choice whereby one chooses good and evil or excludes them.
The question here is, under what categories one wants to contemplate the entire
world and would oneself live. That someone who chooses good and evil chooses
the good is indeed true, but this becomes evident only afterwards, for the
aesthetic is not evil but indifference, and that is why I said that it is the ethical
that constitutes choice. It is less a matter, then, of choosing between willing good
or evil than of choosing to will but, with this latter, good and evil are posited
once again. Someone who chooses the ethical chooses the good, but the good
here is wholly abstract; choosing the ethical merely posits it, and from that it
does not follow that the chooser cannot choose evil again, notwithstanding he
chose good. Here, again, you see the importance of choosing, and that what is
crucial is not so much deliberation as the baptism of choice by which it is
assumed into the ethical. The more time goes, the more difficult the act of choice
becomes, for the soul always finds itself on one side of the dilemma, and it
therefore becomes harder and harder to tear oneself away. And yet that is
necessary if there is to be a choice, and also of supreme importance if a choice is
to mean anything, as I shall show below that it does. […]
Although I am no philosopher, I am obliged at this point to hazard a little
philosophical reflection, which I would ask you not so much to criticize as to
bear in mind. For the polemical outcome echoing through all your hymns of
victory over life bears a remarkable resemblance to the pet theory of recent
philosophy, that the principle of contradiction is annulled.
11
I know well enough
that the standpoint you adopt is an abomination to philosophy; yet it strikes me
that philosophy itself is guilty of the same error; yes, that the reason why this has
not been noticed from the start is that philosophy is even less well placed than
you are. Your situation is the domain of action, philosophy’s is that of
contemplation. As soon as one transfers that to the practical domain it must
come to the same result as you, though not expressing itself in the same way.
You mediate oppositions in a higher lunacy, philosophy does so in a higher unity.
You turn to the future, for action is essentially future-oriented: you say, ‘I can
either do this or do that, but whichever I do is equally wrong, ergo I do nothing
at all.’ Philosophy turns to the past, to the whole of world-historical experience,
it shows how the separated elements come together in a higher unity. […] For
the philosopher world history is concluded, and he mediates.
12 Thus in our age it
is part of the order of the day to be confronted with the distasteful sight of young
men able to mediate Christianity and paganism, able to play with the titanic
forces of history, yet who are unable to tell a plain man what he has to do here in
life, and who do not know any better what they themselves have to do. […]
As truly as there is a future, just as truly is there an either/or. The time in which
the philosopher lives is not absolute time, it is itself an element in that, and one
should always have misgivings when a philosopher bears no fruit; indeed it
should be considered a dishonour, just as in the East it is considered a disgrace to
be barren. So time itself is an element, and philosophy itself is an element in
time. Our own age in its turn will appear to a later age as a discursive moment
and a philosopher of a later age will again mediate it, and so on.
13 To that extent
philosophy is within its rights, and it should be considered an accidental error on
the part of the philosophy of our own time that it mistook our age for absolute
time. But this clearly means that the category of mediation has suffered a
significant blow, and that absolute mediation is only possible when history is
finished, in other words that the System is in constant process of becoming. But
recognition that an absolute mediation exists is what philosophy has retained.
This, naturally, is of the utmost importance, since if one abandons mediation one
abandons speculation. On the other hand, one has scruples about admitting it, for
if mediation is admitted there is no absolute choice, and then there is no absolute
either/or. This is the difficulty, yet I believe it to be due partly to a confusion
between two spheres, those of thought and freedom. For thought the opposition
has no substance, it goes over into the other and the opposites thus come
together in a higher unity. For freedom the opposition does have substance,
because the one opposite now excludes the other. I am not by any means
mistaking liberum arbitrium14
for the true positive freedom, for even the latter
has for all eternity evil outside itself, if only as an impotent possibility, and its
way of perfecting itself is not by increasingly accepting evil but by increasingly
excluding it, and exclusion is precisely the opposite of mediation. Later I shall
show that I do not mean by this to assume the notion of a radical evil.
The spheres that are properly the concern of philosophy, those that are properly
spheres for thought, are logic, nature and history. Here necessity rules and so
mediation has its validity, That this is true of logic and nature nobody will deny;
but with history there are difficulties, for here freedom is said to rule. However, I
believe that history is viewed incorrectly and that this is the source of the
difficulty. For history is more than a product of the free actions of free
individuals. The individual acts, but this action enters into the order of things
which sustains the whole of existence. What its outcome will be the agent does
not really know. But this higher order of things, which, so to speak, digests the
free actions and kneads them together in its eternal laws, is necessity, and this
necessity is the movement in world history; it is therefore quite right for the
philosopher to use mediation, that is to say relative mediation. If I consider a
world-historical individual, I can distinguish between the ‘works’ of which the
Scripture says that they ‘do follow’ him15 and the works through which he
belongs to history. With what might be called inward works philosophy has
nothing whatever to do; but inward work is the true life of freedom. Philosophy
looks at the outward work and sees it not in isolation but as it is absorbed into
and transformed by the world-historical process. It is this process that really
forms philosophy’s object and philosophy looks at it under the category of
necessity. Therefore it keeps at a distance the reflection which would point out
that everything might have been otherwise. It looks at world history in a way in
which there can be no question of an either/or […] though it cannot occur to any
philosopher to deny there is one for the acting individual. Hence the lack of
concern, the conciliation, with which philosophy regards history and its heroes,
for it considers them under the category of necessity. Hence, too, its helplessness
at getting a man to act, its tendency to let everything come to a standstill, for
what it really demands is that one act from necessity, and that is a contradiction.
Thus even the humblest individual has a dual existence. Also, he has a history,
and this is not just a product of his own free actions. But the inward work
belongs to himself and will belong to him in all eternity; this neither history nor
world history can take from him, it follows him either to his joy or to his sorrow.
In this world there rules an absolute either/or, but it is a world philosophy has
nothing to do with. If I imagine an elderly man looking back on an eventful life,
he can get a mediation out of it for thought since his history was woven into that
of the time. But deep inside he gets no mediation; an either/or is still constantly
separating what was separated when he made his choice. If one were to talk here
of a mediation, one might say it was repentance; but repentance is no mediation,
it does not look with longing upon that which should be mediated, that thing is
consumed in its wrath; but this is much like exclusion, the opposite of mediation.
Here it is also evident that I do not assume a notion of radical evil when I admit
the reality of repentance. Repentance is indeed an expression of conciliation, but
it is also an absolutely unconciliatory expression. […]
So it is freedom I am fighting for (partly in this letter, partly and foremost in
myself), for the future, for either/or. That is the treasure I plan to bequeath to
those whom I love in the world; yes, if my little son were at this moment of an
age that he could understand me and my last hour had come, I would say to him,
‘I leave you no fortune, no title and honours, but I know where a treasure lies
buried which can make you richer than the whole world; and this treasure
belongs to you, and you are not even to thank me for it, so no injury is done to
your soul through owing a man everything; this treasure is deposited in your
own inner being: it is an either/or which makes a man greater than the angels.’
Here I will break off this reflection. Perhaps it does not satisfy you. Your
greedy eye devours it without you getting your fill, but that is because the eye
gets its fill last,
16 especially when, like you, one is not hungry but merely
suffering from an unappeasable craving of the eye.
What stands out in my either/or is the ethical. So far, then, it is not a matter of
the choice of some thing, not a matter of the reality of the thing chosen, but of
the reality of choosing. It is this, though, that is decisive and what I shall try to
awaken you to. To reach this point it is possible for one man to help another, but
once he has reached it the importance the one can have for the other becomes
more subordinate. I have remarked in a previous letter that the experience of
having loved gives to a man’s nature a harmony that is never entirely lost; now I
want to say that choosing gives to a man’s nature a solemnity, a quiet dignity,
that is never entirely lost. Many people set extraordinarily great store by having
seen one or another remarkable world-historical personage face to face. The
impression is one they never forget, it has given to their souls an ideal picture
which ennobles their natures. Yet even that instant, however significant, is
nothing compared with the instant of choice. When around me all has become
still, solemn as a starlit night, when the soul is all alone in the world, there
appears before it not a distinguished person, but the eternal power itself. It is as
though the heavens parted, and the I chooses itself – or, more correctly, it accepts
itself. The soul has then seen the highest, which no mortal eye can see and which
never can be forgotten. The personality receives the accolade of knighthood
which ennobles it for an eternity. He does not become someone other than he
was before, he becomes himself; consciousness unites. Just as an heir, even if he
inherits all the world’s treasures, does not own them before coming of age, even
the richest personality is nothing before he has chosen himself, and on the other
hand, even what might be called the poorest personality is everything when he
has chosen himself; for the great thing is not to be this or that, but to be oneself;
and every person can be that if he wants.
That in a sense it is not a matter of a choice of something, you can see from the
fact that what appears on the opposite side is the aesthetic, which is indifference.
Yet it is a matter of a choice, yes, an absolute choice; for only through choosing
absolutely can one choose the ethical. Through the absolute choice, then, the
ethical is posited, but from that it by no means follows that the aesthetic is
excluded. In the ethical the personality is centred in itself; the aesthetic is thus
excluded absolutely, or it is excluded as the absolute, but relatively it always
stays behind. The personality, through choosing itself, chooses itself ethically
and excludes the aesthetic absolutely; but since it is, after all, he himself the
person chooses, and through choosing himself does not become another nature
but remains himself, the whole of the aesthetic returns in its relativity.
So the either/or I have presented is in a sense absolute, for the options are
choosing and not choosing. When the choice confronting one is thus absolute,
either/or is also that. In another sense, however, the absolute either/or first
appears with the choice, for it is now that the options of good and evil appear.
But this choice posited by and in the first choice need not detain me here, I
would merely press you to the point where the choice proves necessary and after
that consider life under ethical categories. I am no ethical rigorist inspired by a
formal abstract freedom; once the choice is posited the whole of the aesthetic
returns, and you shall see that only then is life beautiful, and that only in this
way can a person succeed in saving his soul and gaining the whole world, in
using the world and not abusing it.
But what is it to live aesthetically, and what is it to live ethically? What is the
aesthetic factor in a person, and what the ethical? To this I would answer: The
aesthetic factor in a person is that by which he is immediately what he is; the
ethical factor is that by which he becomes what he becomes. Someone who lives
in and by and of and for the aesthetic factor in himself lives aesthetically.
It is not my aim here to enter into a more detailed consideration of all that this
definition of the aesthetic implies. It would also seem superfluous to want to
enlighten you on what it is to live aesthetically, you who are a practitioner of
such virtuosity in that area that it is rather I who am in need of your help.
Nevertheless, I shall sketch several stages so that we can work our way up to the
point where your life really belongs, which is of importance to me if you are not
to elude me at too early a stage with one of your favourite digressions. Besides, I
do not doubt that there is much I can indeed enlighten you on in regard to what it
is to live aesthetically. Although I would send anyone wanting to live
aesthetically to you as the most reliable guide, I would not refer to you if, in a
higher sense, he wanted to gain insight into what it is to live aesthetically; on
that you would not be able to enlighten him because you are yourself caught up
in it; it could only be explained to him by someone who stands a step higher, or
by someone who lives ethically. You might be tempted for just a second to come
up with the quibble that neither could I give a reliable explanation of what it is to
live ethically, since I am caught up in that. This, however, would merely give me
the opportunity to offer further enlightenment. The reason why someone who
lives aesthetically cannot, in a higher sense, give any enlightenment is that he
lives constantly in the moment, that his knowing is after all confined constantly
to a certain relativity, within a certain boundary. It is not at all my purpose to
deny that living aesthetically, when such a life is at its peak, can call for a
multiplicity of intellectual gifts, even, indeed, that these may be developed to an
unusual degree; but they are fettered and transparency is lacking. Thus one often
finds species of animals with senses much keener and of far greater intensity
than those of man, but they are bound to the animal’s instinct. I would gladly
take you as an example. I have never denied your outstanding intellectual gifts,
as you will see from the fact that I have often enough reproached you for
abusing them. You are witty, ironic, observant, a dialectician, experienced in
pleasure, you can calculate the instant, you are sentimental, heartless, all
depending on the circumstances. But beneath all this you are all the time only in
the moment, your life therefore disintegrates and it is impossible for you to
explain it. Now if someone wanted to learn the art of pleasure, it would be quite
right to go to you; but if he wants to understand your life, he is addressing
himself to the wrong person. With me he would perhaps sooner find what he
seeks, although I by no means possess your intellectual gifts. You are caught up,
and have as it were no time to tear yourself away; I am not caught up, either in
my judgement of the aesthetic or in that of the ethical, just because within the
ethical I am raised above the instant, I am in freedom; but it is a contradiction to
suggest that one can be caught up in being free.
Every man, however modest his talents, however subordinate his position,
feels a natural need to form a view of life, a conception of life’s meaning and
aim. A person who lives aesthetically has that too, and the general description
heard in all ages and from the most diverse stages is this: one must enjoy life. It
has, of course, very many variations, accordingly as conceptions of pleasure
vary, but in this expression, that one must enjoy life, they are all united. But the
person who says that he wants to enjoy life always posits a condition which is
either outside the individual or in the individual but not posited by the individual
himself. I would beg you, regarding this last point, to keep a fairly good hold of
the expressions used, since they are chosen with care.
Let us now review these stages quite briefly in order to catch up with you. You
are perhaps already a little annoyed at my proposal for a general description of
living aesthetically; still, you can hardly deny its accuracy. One hears you often
enough scoffing at people for not knowing how to enjoy life, while you think
that you, for your part, have studied it from top to bottom. It is quite possible
they do not understand it, but in the expression itself they none the less agree
with you. Perhaps, then, you suspect that, in this inquiry, you are to be teamed up
with people who are otherwise an abomination to you. Maybe you think I should
be courteous enough to treat you as an artist and pass over in silence those
dabblers you have trouble enough with in life and with whom you wish to have
nothing in common. However, I cannot help you here, for there is something that
you have in common with them after all, and something very essential at that –
namely, a view of life; and in my eyes that in which you differ from them is
unessential. I cannot help laughing at you; do you not see, my young friend, that
it is a curse that accompanies you, these many brothers in art that you acquire
but whom you have no intention at all of acknowledging? You are prone to poor
and vulgar company, you who are so superior. I don’t deny it must be very
disagreeable to have a life-view in common with every carouser or sportsman.
Nor, indeed, is that altogether the case; for you are placed to some degree
beyond the aesthetic domain, as I shall show later.
Great as the differences within the aesthetic sphere may be, all stages have the
essential similarity that spirit appears not in the form of spirit but in the form of
immediacy. The differences may be extraordinary, from plain philistinism to the
greatest intellectual refinement, but even at the stage where such refinement
appears the spirit has the form not of spirit but of talent.
I will describe each particular stage quite briefly and dwell only on what, in
one way or another, fits your case, or that I could wish you would apply to
yourself. In its immediate guise, personality has the form not of the spiritual but
of the psychic. Here we have a life-view which teaches that health is the most
precious good, that on which everything depends. The same view is given a
more poetic expression when beauty is said to be the highest thing. Beauty,
however, is a very fragile good, and it is seldom that one sees this view of life
enacted. One comes across a young girl, often enough, or a young man, who for
a brief period set great store by their beauty, but it soon lets them down. I
remember, however, in my student days, […] sometimes on my holidays I went
to the residence of a count in one of the provinces. In his younger days he had
had a diplomatic post, but was now elderly and lived quietly on his country
estate. The countess had been exceptionally beautiful as a young girl; even in her
old age she was the most beautiful lady I have seen. […] Both of them were
highly cultivated, yet the countess’s life-view was concentrated on the thought
that they were the most beautiful couple in the whole land. I still recall quite
vividly an occurrence which convinced me of this. It was a Sunday morning and
there was a little festival at the nearby church. The countess did not feel well
enough to attend; but the count betook himself there in the morning, dressed up
in all his finery, his uniform of gentleman-in-waiting, decorated with his orders.
The windows of the great hall opened upon an avenue which led up to the
church. The countess was standing at one of them. […] Far down the avenue the
count appeared […] and when he came near enough to see the countess through
the window, with grace and decorum she threw him a kiss, then turned to me and
said ‘Little Vilhelm, isn’t my Ditlev the handsomest man in the whole kingdom?
Yes, I can see he looks a little sunken on one side, but no one notices it when I’m
walking with him, and when we walk together we are surely the handsomest
couple in the whole land.’ No little miss of sixteen could be as blissfully happy
over her fiancé, the handsome gentleman of the bedchamber, as her ladyship
over the already aged lord-in-waiting.
Both life-views agree that one must enjoy life. The condition for doing so lies
in the individual, but not in a way that it is posited by the individual.
We proceed. We come across views of life which teach that one must enjoy life
but place the condition for doing so outside the individual. This is the case with
every life-view which makes wealth, glory, nobility, etc., life’s task and content.
Here I would also speak of a certain kind of infatuation. Were I to imagine a
young girl head-over-heels in love, whose eye knew no pleasure but to see her
beloved, whose soul had no thought but for him, whose heart had no desire but
to be his, for whom nothing, nothing at all in heaven or on earth, had meaning
except him, then here again we have an aesthetic view of life in which the
condition is placed outside the individual itself. You, of course, find it foolish to
love in that way; you think it is something that only occurs in novels. It is
conceivable, however, and one can at least be sure that in the eyes of many, such
a love would be regarded as something exceptional. I will explain later why I
cannot approve of it.
We proceed. We meet views of life which teach that one must enjoy life but the
condition for doing so lies in the individual, though not posited, however, by the
individual. In this case personality is presented in general under the category of
talent, a practical talent, a mercantile talent, a mathematical talent, a poetic
talent, an artistic talent, a philosophical talent. Satisfaction in life, pleasure, is
sought in the development of this talent. Perhaps one does not remain with one’s
talent in its state of immediacy, one can educate it in all manner of ways, but the
condition for satisfaction in life is the talent itself, a condition not posited by the
individual. Those people in whom one finds this life-view are often among those
accustomed to being the constant object of your scorn because of their tireless
activity. You think you yourself live aesthetically and will in no way admit it of
them. That you have a different view of what it is to enjoy life is undeniable, but
this is not what is essential; the essential thing is that one wants to enjoy life.
Your life is far superior to theirs, but theirs is also far more innocent than yours.
Now just as all these views have in common that they are aesthetic, so too they
resemble one another in having a certain unity, a certain coherence, that is, one
definite thing on which everything depends. What they build their lives on is
something inherently simple, and so their lives do not split up as those that are
built on what is inherently diverse. The latter is the case with the life-view I shall
now dwell on a little more closely. It teaches: ‘Enjoy life’, and interprets this as:
‘Live for your desire.’ Desire, however, is inherently diverse; it is thus easy to
see that a life built on desire splits into an endless diversity, except where in
some particular individual desire has, from childhood, become determinate in the
form of some particular desire, which then deserves rather to be called a
propensity, a bent, for instance for fishing, or hunting, or keeping horses, etc.
Inasmuch as this view of life splits into a diversity, it is easy to see that it lies in
the sphere of reflection; this reflection, however, is nevertheless always a finite
reflection and the personality remains in its immediacy. In desire itself the
individual is immediate, and however cultivated or refined the desire, however
artful, the individual is nevertheless in it qua immediate, in the enjoyment he is
in the moment, and whatever diversity he has in this respect, he is still always
immediate because he is in the moment. Now, living for the satisfaction of one’s
desire is to enjoy a very exclusive position in life, and God be praised we seldom
see it practised, due to the tribulations of earthly life which give man something
else to think about. If that were not so, I do not doubt but that we would be
frequent enough witnesses to this terrible spectacle; at least one often hears
people complain that they feel inhibited by the prosaic life, which often only
means that they long to let themselves go in all the wild folly that desire can
whirl a man into. For in order to put this view into practice, the individual must
be in possession of a diversity of outward conditions, and this good fortune, or
rather misfortune, seldom falls to a man’s lot – misfortune because it is certainly
not from the merciful gods, but the gods of wrath, that this good fortune comes.
One seldom sees this life-view enacted on any significant scale. On the other
hand, one not infrequently sees people who dabble at it a little, and when the
conditions cease to exist they think that if only the conditions had been under
their own control, then they would certainly have achieved the happiness and joy
they craved for in life. In history, however, now and then one meets examples.
And since I believe it may be useful to see where this life-view leads, precisely
when everything favours it, I will present such a figure, choosing for this end
that all-powerful man, the emperor Nero, to whom a world did homage, and who
always found himself surrounded by an innumerable host of willing emissaries
of pleasure. Once, with your usual recklessness, you said that one could not
blame Nero for setting fire to Rome in order to get some idea of the
conflagration of Troy, but that one might question whether he really had enough
of the artist in him to know how to enjoy it. Now it is one of your imperial
pleasures never to shrink from any thought, never to let it appal you. For that one
needs no imperial guard, not gold and silver, not all the world’s treasures; one
can do it quite alone and consummate it privately; it is therefore a wiser
pleasure, but no less appalling. Your aim was not to conduct a defence of Nero,
and yet there is a kind of defence in your fixing attention not on what he does
but on how he does it. Still, I know very well this recklessness of thought is
something one often finds in young people, who try it out, as it were, on the
world at such moments, and are then easily tempted to extol it themselves,
especially when others are listening. I know very well that you and every person,
yes, that Nero himself would shrink from such wild folly, and yet I would never
recommend that any person credit himself in the strictest sense with enough
strength not to become a Nero. For when, to describe Nero’s nature, I mention
what in my view was its main constituent, it may well strike you as much too
mild a word for that, and yet I am certainly no mild judge, even though there is
another sense in which I never judge another person. But believe you me, the
word is not too mild, it is the right one, but it can also show how near a person is
to such a lapse; indeed it can be said that there comes a moment, for every
person who does not pass his whole life like a child, a glimpse, if only in the
distance, of such a damnation. Nero’s nature was melancholy. Nowadays it has
become something big to be melancholy; in a way I can well see why you find
this word too mild; I subscribe to an earlier Church doctrine which counted
melancholy among the cardinal sins. If I am right, this to be sure will be very
bad news for you, for it turns your whole view of life upside down. But to avoid
misunderstanding, I will remark at once that a person can be in sorrow and
distress to such an infinite degree that perhaps it pursues him all his life; and
although that may be well and true, a person becomes melancholy only by his
own fault.
So I imagine the imperial voluptuary. […] I imagine him a little on in years,
his youth is past, the lightheartedness has gone out of him, and he is already
conversant with every conceivable pleasure, gratified by it to the full. This life,
however dissolute, has nevertheless matured his soul, though in spite of all his
worldly understanding, his experience, he is still a child, or a youth. The
immediacy of spirit cannot break through yet demands a breakthrough, a higher
form of existence. But if that is to happen there will come a moment when the
splendour of the throne, his power and might, pale, and for this he lacks the
courage. So he grabs at pleasure, all the world’s ingenuity must think up new
pleasures for him, for it is only in the moment of pleasure he finds peace, and
when it is over he yawns in ennui. […] He does not have himself; only when the
world shivers for him is he appeased, for then at least there is no one who dares
seize him. Therefore this anxiety for people, something Nero has in common
with every such personality. […] He burns down half of Rome but his torment is
the same. Soon such things no longer amuse him. There is an even higher desire;
he wants to make people anxious. To himself he is a riddle, and anxiety his
being. Now he wants to be a riddle for everyone and to revel in their anxiety.
[…] And this anxiety amuses him. He doesn’t want to impress, he wants to
unsettle. […] He does not enter proudly, with imperial dignity; weak, impotent,
he slinks forward stealthily, for this powerlessness is even more disquieting. […]
He could have the child hewn down before its mother’s eyes if only her despair
might give passion a new expression that could amuse him. Were he not the
Emperor of Rome he might end his life with suicide; for really it is only another
expression of the same: that Caligula should want all men’s heads on one neck
so the whole could be annihilated with one stroke, and for a man to take his own
life. […] Whether this was the case with Nero I do not know, but in personalities
of this kind one sometimes finds a certain good-naturedness, and if Nero had
that, I have no doubt that his circle were ready to call it condescension. This
gives the matter a peculiar twist, but it also provides new proof of the immediacy
which through its repression constitutes genuine melancholy. […]
What, then, is melancholy? It is hysteria of the spirit. There comes a moment
in a man’s life when immediacy is as though ripened and when the spirit
demands a higher form in which it will apprehend itself as spirit. In its
immediacy spirit coheres, as it were, with the whole of earthly life, and now the
spirit wants to gather itself out of this dispersion, and make itself selftransparent; the personality wants to be conscious of itself in its eternal validity.
If this does not happen and the movement halts and is pressed back, melancholy
sets in. One can do much to bring it into oblivion, one can work, one can seize
more innocent expedients than a Nero, but the melancholy remains. There is
something unaccountable in melancholy. A person in sorrow or distress knows
why he sorrows or is distressed. If you ask a melancholic what reason he has for
his condition, what it is that weighs down on him, he will reply, ‘I don’t know
what it is, I can’t explain it.’ Therein lies melancholy’s infinitude. The reply is
perfectly correct, for as soon as he knows what it is, the effect is removed,
whereas the grief of the griever is by no means removed by his knowing why he
grieves. But melancholy is sin, really it is a sin as great as any, for it is the sin of
not willing deeply and sincerely, and this is a mother to all sins. This sickness, or
more properly, this sin, is extremely common in our time, and accordingly it is
under this that the whole of German and French youth groan. I will not provoke
you, I would treat you as considerately as possible. I gladly admit that being
melancholy is in a sense not a bad sign, for as a rule only the most gifted natures
are afflicted by it. […] People whose souls have no acquaintance with
melancholy are those whose souls have no presentiment of metamorphosis.
These I do not concern myself with here, for I am writing only of and to you,
and to you I think this explanation will be satisfactory, for you scarcely assume,
as many physicians do, that melancholy is a bodily ailment, though for all that,
remarkably enough, physicians cannot cure it; only the spirit can cure it, for it
lies in the spirit, and when the spirit finds itself all small sorrows vanish, those
reasons which in the view of some produce melancholy – that one cannot find
oneself in the world, that one comes to the world both too late and too early, that
one cannot find one’s place in life; but for the person who owns himself
eternally, it is neither too early nor too late that he comes to the world, and the
person who possesses himself in his eternal validity will surely find his
significance in this life.
This, however, has been a digression, for which I hope you will forgive me,
since really it arose for your sake. I now return to the life-view which thinks one
must live to satisfy desire. A prudent common sense readily perceives that this
cannot be carried through and that it is therefore not worth starting on. A refined
egoism perceives that it misses the point in pleasure. Here, then, we have a lifeview which teaches ‘Enjoy life’, and then expresses itself again thus: ‘Enjoy
yourself; it is you yourself in the enjoyment that you must enjoy.’ This is a
higher reflection. Naturally, however, it does not penetrate into the personality
itself; this remains in its accidental immediacy. After all, here too the condition
for enjoyment is external and not within the individual’s control; for although he,
as he says, enjoys himself, he still only enjoys himself in the enjoyment, but the
enjoyment itself is tied to an external condition. The only difference is that his
enjoyment is reflective, not immediate. So even this Epicureanism depends on a
condition over which it has no control. A certain callousness of reason then
teaches a way out: ‘Enjoy yourself in constantly discarding the conditions.’ But
self-evidently, the person who enjoys himself in discarding the conditions is just
as much dependent on them as the one who enjoys them. His reflection turns
constantly back on himself, and since his enjoyment consists in the enjoyment’s
being given as little content as possible, he is, as it were, hollowing himself out,
since naturally such a reflection is incapable of opening the personality.
I believe these observations of mine have now given you at least a
recognizable outline of the territory of the aesthetic view of life. All stages have
in common that one lives for that in which one is immediately what one is; for
reflection never grasps high enough to reach beyond that. I have provided no
more than a very hasty glimpse, but I have not wished to give more; for me the
different stages are not important, only that movement which is unavoidably
necessary, as I shall now show, and it is on this I would beg you fasten your
attention.
Let me assume, then, that our man who lived for his health was, to use your
expression, as quick as ever when he died; that our noble couple danced at their
golden wedding and a whisper ran through the hall, just as when they danced on
their wedding day; I assume that the rich man’s gold mines were inexhaustible,
that honours and esteem marked the happy man’s pilgrimage through life; I
assume that the young girl got the one she loved, that with his connections the
mercantile talent hitched all five continents together, and kept all the world’s
exchanges in his own exchange, that the mechanical talent joined together
heaven and earth – I assume that Nero never yawned but a new pleasure
surprised him every moment, that every instant our astute Epicurean could enjoy
himself by himself, that the Cynic always had conditions [of enjoyment] to
discard so as to take pleasure in his own lightness – I assume this, and so all
these people were happy. You would probably not say that; the reason why I
shall explain later. But this you will readily admit: that many people would in
fact think this way, yes, that this or that person would fancy he had said
something extremely clever if he added that what they lacked was that they did
not appreciate the fact. I will now assume the opposite. None of this happens. So
what? They despair. No doubt you would not do that either. Perhaps you will say
it isn’t worth the trouble. Why you will not admit despair I shall explain later;
here I ask only that you recognize that a fair number of people find it right and
proper to despair. Let us now see why they despaired. Because they discovered
that what they had built their lives on was transitory? But is that, then, a reason
to despair, has what they built their lives on changed in any essential? Is it an
essential change in what is transitory that it prove to be so? Or is it not rather the
case that if it does not prove to be so, then that is what is accidental and
unessential? So nothing new has come about that could provide the basis for
such a change. If they do despair, then, that must be because they were in despair
beforehand. The difference is just that they did not know it, but that indeed is an
altogether accidental difference. It turns out, then, that every aesthetic view of
life is despair, and that everyone who lives aesthetically is in despair whether he
knows it or not. But if one does know it, and you indeed do, then a higher form
of existence is an inescapable requirement. […]
It might seem, then, that the correct thing was to undertake the movement by
which the ethical emerges. But there is still one stage, however, an aesthetic lifeview, the most refined and exclusive of them all, which I shall discuss with the
greatest of care, for now it is your turn. Everything I have explained in the above
you can calmly go along with, and in a way it is not you I have been addressing;
also it would be of little use talking to you thus or informing you of the vanity of
life. That is something you know very well and have indeed tried in your own
way to adjust to. The reason I have presented it is this: that I want to cover my
rear, I want to prevent you from suddenly leaping back. This last life-view is
despair itself. It is an aesthetic life-view, for the personality remains in its
immediacy; it is the last aesthetic life-view, for it has to an extent admitted to
itself a consciousness of the nothingness of such a life-view. However, there is
despair and despair. Were I to imagine an artist, a painter, for example, who
becomes blind, then if there was any depth in him he might perhaps despair.
What he despairs over, then, is this particular thing, and if his sight returned the
despair would cease. This is not the case with you. You are far too gifted
mentally, and your soul is in a sense too deep for this to happen to you. Nor, in
outward respects, has any such misfortune befallen you. You still have in your
power all the requirements of an aesthetic life-view. You have wealth,
independence, your health is unimpaired, your mind is still vigorous, and you
have not yet been made unhappy by a young girl not wanting to love you. Yours
is no current despair but a despair in thought. Your thought has hurried on ahead,
you have seen through the vanity of everything but you have not come any
further. On occasion you duck down into it and in abandoning yourself for a
single moment to pleasure you discover also, in your consciousness, that it is
vanity. You are thus constantly beyond yourself, that is to say, in despair. This is
why your life lies between two huge antitheses: sometimes you are
intemperately energetic, at others just as immoderately indolent. […]
Here, then, I have your life-view, and believe me, much in your life will be
explicable to you if, with me, you regard it as thought-despair. You are a hater of
activity in life; quite right, for before there can be any meaning in activity life
must have continuity, and this your life lacks. You occupy yourself with your
studies, that is true, you are even industrious. But it is only for your own sake
and is done with as little teleology as possible. Otherwise you are unoccupied;
like those workers in the Gospel, you stand idle in the market-place.
17 You stick
your hands in your pockets and observe life. Then you rest in despair, nothing
occupies you, you don’t step aside for anything: ‘If someone were to throw a tile
down from the roof I wouldn’t get out of the way.’ You are like someone dying,
you die daily, not in the profound, serious sense in which one usually takes that
word, but life has lost its reality and ‘you always reckon your lifetime from one
day’s notice to quit to the next’. You let everything pass you by, it makes no
impression, but then suddenly something comes which grips you, an idea, a
situation, a smile from a young girl, and then you are ‘in touch’; for just as on
some occasions you are not in touch, so at others you are in touch and of service
in every way. Wherever something is going on you are ‘in touch’. You conduct
your life as it is your custom to behave in a crowd, you ‘work your way into the
thickest of it, trying if possible to be forced up above the others so as to be able
to lie on top of them’; if you manage to get up there you ‘make yourself as
comfortable as possible’, and this is also the way you let yourself be carried
along through life. But when the crowd disperses, when the event is over, you
stand once more at the street corner and look at the world. A dying person
possesses, as you know, a supernatural energy, and so too with you. If there is an
idea to be thought through, a work to be read through, a plan to be carried out, a
little adventure to be experienced – yes, a hat to be bought, you take hold of the
matter with an immense energy. According to circumstance, you work untiringly
for a day, for a month; you are happy in the assurance that you still have the
same abundance of strength as before, you take no rest, ‘no Satan can keep up
with you’. If you work together with others, you work them into the ground. But
then when the month or, what you always consider the maximum, the six months
have gone, you break off and say, ‘and that’s the end of the story’. You retire and
leave it all to the other party, or if you have been working alone you talk to no
one about what you were doing. You then pretend to yourself and others that you
have lost the desire and flatter yourself with the vain thought that you could have
kept working with the same intensity if that is what you desired. But that is an
immense deception. You would have succeeded in finishing it, as most others, if
you had patiently willed it so, but you would have found out at the same time
that it needs a kind of perseverance quite different from yours. […]
You are always hovering above yourself, but the higher ether, the more refined
sublimate into which you are vaporized, is the nothing of despair and you see
below you a multitude of areas of learning, insight, study, observation which for
you, though, have no reality but which you quite randomly exploit and combine
so as to adorn as tastefully as possible the palace of mental profusion in which
you occasionally reside. […] [What] you see below you is a multitude of moods
and situations which you use to make interesting contacts with life. You can be
sentimental, heartless, ironic, witty; in this respect one must admit you have
learning. Thus as soon as something can rouse you out of your indolence you are
fully active, with all your passion, and your activity does not lack art, as you are
only too well equipped with wit, resilience, and all the seductive gifts of the
mind. You are, as you yourself with such complacent presumption put it, never
so discourteous as to put in an appearance without bringing with you a small,
fragrant, freshly plucked bouquet of wit. The more one knows you, the more one
must be astonished at the calculating shrewdness that permeates everything you
do in the short time you are moved by passion; for passion never blinds you but
only makes you more clear-sighted. You forget your despair and everything else
that weighs upon your soul and thought; the accidental contact you have made
with a person absorbs you completely. […] [You] exist in the instant, and in the
instant you are of supernatural size; you invest your whole soul in it, even by an
effort of will, since in the instant your being is absolutely in your power.
Someone who sees you only in such an instant is very easily deceived, while
someone who waits for the next instant can easily come to crow over you. You
may recall the well-known legend from Musaeus about Roland’s three pages.
18
One of them acquired from the old witch they visited in the forest a thimble
which made him invisible. With it he made his way into the chambers of the
beautiful princess Urraca and declared his love for her, which made a strong
impression upon her since she saw no one and so presumed it must be a fairy
prince, at least, who honoured her with his love. However, she required him to
reveal himself. This is where the difficulty lay: as soon as he became visible the
fascination had to vanish, and yet he would have no pleasure of his love if he
could not reveal himself. As it happens, I have Musaeus’s fairy-tale to hand and
will transcribe a little passage from it which I would beg you to read for your
own true good. ‘He agreed, it seemed reluctantly, and the princess’s fantasy
projected the picture of the most beautiful man whom she thought with eager
expectation she was about to see. But what a contrast between the original and
the ideal when all that appeared was a common, everyday visage, an ordinary
person whose physiognomy betrayed neither the glance of genius nor the soul of
sentiment.’ What you wish to achieve through these contacts with people, you do
achieve, because since you are considerably shrewder than that page, you readily
see that it cannot pay to reveal oneself. Once you have passed off an ideal
picture of yourself on someone – and one has to admit you are able to appear
ideal in any circumstance whatsoever – you carefully withdraw and so have then
the pleasure of having fooled someone. What you attain besides is a break in the
coherence of your view, and one more point from which to start all over again.
In theoretical respects you are through with the world, the finite cannot sustain
itself in your thought; in practical respects, too, you are to some extent through
with it, in an aesthetic sense, that is. Nevertheless you have no view of life. You
have something resembling a view and this gives your life a certain composure
which must not, though, be confused with a secure and refreshing confidence in
life. You are composed only in contrast to one who still pursues the
prestidigitations of pleasure, per mare pauperiem fugiens, per saxa, per ignes.
19
In relation to pleasure you have an absolutely superior pride. That is quite as it
should be, for indeed you are through with the whole of finitude. And yet you
cannot give it up. You are content compared with those who chase after
contentment, but what you have become content with is absolute discontent. To
see all the world’s glories does not concern you, for in thought you are beyond
them, and if the chance were offered you would say, as always, ‘Yes, one might
well devote a day to them.’ It does not trouble you that you have not become a
millionaire, and if the chance of that were offered, you would no doubt reply,
‘Yes, it might have been really interesting to be that and one could well spend a
month on it.’ Were it possible to offer you the love of the most beautiful girl you
would still reply, ‘Yes, for half a year that would be really fine.’ I shall not join
in the plaintive cry often directed at you, that you are insatiable; I will say rather:
in a sense you are right, for nothing finite, even the whole world, can satisfy the
soul of one who feels a need for the eternal. Were one able to offer you honour
and glory, the admiration of your contemporaries – and that, after all, is your
weakest point – you would reply, ‘Yes, for a short while it wouldn’t be too bad.’
You do not really want it and you would not take one step to acquire it. You
would perceive that for such recognition to have any meaning your gifts would
have to be so outstanding that you deserved it; here, too, your thought sees even
in the highest degree of intellectual talent something transitory. So your polemics
provide you with an even more extreme expression when, in your inner
resentment at the whole of life, you could wish you were the most foolish of men
and yet admired and worshipped by your contemporaries as the wisest, for that
would be a far more profound mockery of the whole of existence than if the
genuinely most capable man were honoured as such. So you desire nothing, wish
for nothing, for the only thing you might wish for is a divining-rod which could
give you everything, and then you would use it for scraping out your pipe. Thus,
you are through with life and ‘have no need to make a will since you have
nothing to leave’. But you cannot hold out on this extremity, for indeed your
thought has taken everything from you but it has given you nothing in its stead.
The next instant some little triviality captivates you. You look upon it, indeed,
with all the superiority and pride your overbearing thought gives you, you
despise it as a worthless toy, you are almost bored with it before you take it in
your hand; but still it preoccupies you, and even if it is not the thing itself that
preoccupies you – as always – you are still preoccupied with your being willing
to stoop to it. In this way, once it is people you have to do with, your nature
exhibits a high degree of faithlessness, for which one cannot blame you morally,
however, since you are outside the category of the ethical. Fortunately for others
you participate very little, so one does not notice it. You come often to my house,
and you know you are always welcome, but you know also that it never occurs
to me to invite you to participate in the least thing. I would not even take a drive
in the woods with you, not because you cannot be very gay and entertaining but
because your participation is always a falsehood, for if you really take pleasure
one can always be certain it is not in something we others are taking pleasure in,
or in the drive, but in something you have in mente; and if you do not take
pleasure it is not because something unpleasant happens that puts you out of
sorts, for that could also happen to the rest of us, but because the moment you
climb into the carriage you have already seen the vacuity of this amusement. I
am ready to forgive you, for your mind is always too active, and it is true what
you often say of yourself, that you are like a woman in confinement and when
one is in that ‘condition’ it is no wonder one is a little different from others.
Yet the spirit is not to be mocked, it takes its revenge on you, it fetters you in
the chains of melancholy. My young friend, this is the way to become a Nero, if
in your soul there was not an original seriousness, if there was not an innate
depth in your thought, if there was no magnanimity in your soul – and if you had
become Emperor of Rome. Yet you go another way. There now appears before
you a life-view which seems the only one that can satisfy you: it is to immerse
your soul in sadness and sorrow. Yet your thought is too healthy for this lifeview to stand its test, for to an aesthetic sorrow of this kind existence is just as
vain as it is to any other aesthetic view of life. If a person cannot sorrow more
deeply, then it is true to say that the sorrow passes just as much as the joy, for
everything that is merely finite passes away. And if many find it comforting that
sorrow passes, this thought seems to me just as comfortless as the thought that
joy passes. So this life-view, too, your thought annihilates, and when one has
annihilated sorrow one does indeed retain joy; in place of sorrow you choose a
joy which is sorrow’s changeling. This is the joy you have now chosen, this
laughter of despair. You return again to life, and under this illumination existence
acquires a new interest for you. Just as you take a great delight in talking with
children in a way they excellently, easily and naturally understand, though for
yourself what you say means something quite different, so you delight in
deceiving people with your laughter. When you can get people to laugh and
shout for joy and be delighted with you, you triumph over the whole world; you
say to yourself, ‘If only you knew what you are laughing at!’
Yet the spirit is not to be mocked, and the darkness of melancholy thickens
about you, and the lightning flash of an insane wit only reveals it to you the
more strongly, the more horribly. And there is nothing that distracts you, all the
world’s pleasure has no importance for you, and though you envy simple people
the foolish enjoyment of life, you yourself do not pursue it. Pleasure does not
tempt you; and however lamentable your condition, it is truly providential that it
does not. It is my intention to praise not the pride in you that scorns pleasure but
rather the moderation that holds your thought firm, for if you were tempted by
pleasure you would be done for. But the fact that it does not tempt you shows
what path you must take, that you must go forward and not turn back. There is
another false path no less dreadful, and here again I rely not on your pride but on
the moderation that constantly holds you upright. It is true you are proud, and
that it is better for a person to be proud than vain; it is true there is a fearful
passion in your thought, that you look on it as a claim you have no intention of
renouncing, that ‘you would rather consider yourself an unpaid creditor in the
world than cancel it’ – and yet all human pride is but a fragile security.
Take note, then, my young friend, this life is despair; hide it from others if you
will, from yourself you cannot hide it, it is despair. And yet in another sense this
life is not despair. You are too frivolous to despair; and you are too melancholy
not to come in contact with despair. You are like a woman giving birth and yet
you are forever putting off the moment and remain constantly in pain. Were a
woman in travail to get the idea that she might give birth to a monster, or were
she to wonder what it really was she was about to give birth to, her case would
be not unlike yours. Her attempt to stay the course of nature would be
unavailing, but yours indeed can succeed; for what a person gives birth to in a
spiritual sense is a creative urge of the will, and that is in man’s own power.
What then is it you are afraid of? You are not going to give birth to another
human being, you will give birth only to yourself. And yet, as I know well, there
is a gravity in this which perturbs the whole soul; to be conscious of oneself in
one’s eternal validity is a moment more significant than everything in the world.
It is as though you were caught and trapped and now could never again escape,
either in time or eternity; it is as though you lost yourself, as though you ceased
to be; it is as though the next moment you would rue it and yet it cannot be
undone. It is a grave and significant moment when one binds oneself for an
eternity to an eternal power, when one receives oneself as the one whose
memory no time shall efface, when in an eternal and unfailing sense one
becomes aware of oneself as the person one is. And yet, one can still let it be!
Look: here, then, is an either/or. Let me talk to you in a way I never would if
another were listening, because in a sense I have no right to do so and because
really I am speaking only of the future. If this is not what you will, if you want to
keep on diverting your soul with the vanities and vacuities of wit and esprit, then
do so; leave your home, travel, go to Paris, give yourself up to journalism, court
the smiles of voluptuous women, cool their hot blood with the breeze of your
wit, let it be the proud task of your life’s activity to drive away an idle woman’s
boredom or the gloomy thoughts of a flagging sensualist, forget that you were a
child, that there was piety in your soul and innocence in your thought, deaden
every higher voice in your breast, drowse your life away in the petty brilliance of
the soirée, forget that there is an immortal spirit in you, torment your soul to the
last farthing; and when wit falls silent there is water enough in the Seine and
gunpowder in the general store and travelling companions for any hour of the
day. But if you cannot do that, if you will not – and you neither can nor will –
then pull yourself together, stifle every rebellious thought that would presume
high treason against your better nature, despise all the pettiness that would envy
you your intellectual gifts and which itself desires them in order to put them to
even worse use, despise the hypocritical virtue which bears life’s burdens
unwillingly yet still wants to be honoured for bearing them; but do not despise
life itself on that account, respect every honourable effort, every modest activity
which conceals itself in humility, and above all show a little more respect for
woman; believe me, it is from her that salvation comes, as certainly as depravity
comes from the man. I am a husband and to that extent partial, but it is my
conviction that if ever a woman plunged humanity into depravity she has also
fairly and honestly made up for it, and still does; for of a hundred men who go
astray in the world ninety-nine are saved by women, one by a direct divine
grace. And since I also believe that it is man’s nature to go astray in one way or
another, that this is as true of the man’s life as it is true of the woman’s that she
should remain in the pure and innocent peace of immediacy, you readily perceive
that in my view the woman gives ample requital for what she has done.
What then are you to do? Another person might say: ‘Get married; then you’ll
have something else to think about.’ Certainly, but the question remains whether
that would be to your advantage, and whatever you think of the opposite sex, at
least your thoughts are too chivalrous for you to wish to marry for that reason,
and besides, if you cannot maintain yourself, you will hardly find another
capable of doing that. Or one might say, ‘Apply for some office, throw yourself
into business life, that’s a distraction, and you will forget your melancholy;
work, that’s the best thing.’ You might manage to reach the point where it seems
as though forgotten, but forgotten it is not; now and then it will still erupt, more
dreadfully than ever; it might then be able, as hitherto it has not, to take you by
surprise. Besides, whatever you think of life and its affairs, you will think too
chivalrously of yourself to choose a position for that reason, for it is, after all, a
kind of falsehood, just as marrying on that account. What then are you to do? I
have only one answer: ‘Despair!’
I am a married man, my soul clings surely and unwaveringly to my wife, my
children, to this life whose beauty I shall always acclaim. So when I say
‘Despair!’ it is no overwrought youth who would have you whirled off into a
maelstrom of passions, no mocking demon shouting out this comfort to the
shipwrecked; I shout it to you not as a comfort, not as a state in which you are to
remain, but as an action requiring all the soul’s strength and gravity and selfcommand, as sure as it is my conviction, my triumph over the world, that any
person who has not tasted the bitterness of despair has missed the meaning of
life, however beautiful and joy-filled his life has been. You do not commit any
fraud upon the world you live in, you are not lost to it, for you have conquered it,
as surely as I can count myself an honourable married man even though I, too,
have despaired.
When I look at your life in this way I would call you fortunate, for truly it is of
the utmost importance that a person does not look amiss at life in the moment of
despair; it is just as crucial for him as for someone giving birth that things should
not go wrong. The person who despairs over something in particular runs the
risk of his despair not being true and profound, of its being a disappointment, a
sorrow in that particular respect. You will not despair in that way for you have
not suffered any deprivation, you still have everything. If the despairer makes a
mistake, if he believes the misfortune lies in the complex world outside him, his
despair is not true and it will lead him to hate the world and not to love it; for no
matter how much the world gets in your way because it seems as if it wanted to
be something else than it can be for you, once you have found your own self in
despair you will love it for being the world that it is. If what brings a person to
despair is some guilt and offence, a troubled conscience, he may perhaps have
difficulty in regaining his good cheer. So, despair, then, with all your soul and
mind; the longer you put it off, the harder the conditions become and what is
required remains the same, I shout it out to you, like the woman who offered
Tarquin a collection of books for sale and, when he refused to pay the sum she
asked, she burnt a third of them and demanded the same sum, and when again he
refused to give the sum asked, burnt another third and demanded the same sum,
until he finally gave the original sum for the remaining third.
The condition for despair in your case is therefore excellent, and yet there is an
even better. Imagine a young man, gifted like you. Let him love a girl, love her
as much as himself. Let him once ponder in a quiet hour what he has built his
life on, and on what she has built hers. The love is something they have in
common, and yet he will feel there are differences. She, perhaps, has the gift of
beauty, yet for him this is of no importance and is after all so fragile; maybe she
has the joyful disposition of youth, yet for him this joy has no real meaning. But
the intellectual authority is his and he feels its strength. He truly wants to love
her, so it will not occur to him to give that to her and her humble soul will not
demand it, and yet there is a difference and he will feel that it must vanish if he
is truly to love her. He will then let his soul sink into despair. He despairs not for
his own sake but for hers, yet it is also for his own sake, for he loves her as much
as himself. The power of despair will then consume everything until he finds
himself in his eternal validity, but then he has also found her and no knight will
return happier and more joyful from the most hazardous exploits than he from
this conflict with flesh and blood and the empty distinctions of the finite, for he
who despairs finds the eternally human being and in that we are all equal. The
foolish thought of wanting to bring about likeness by deadening his own mind or
neglecting its cultivation will not occur to him; he will preserve his mental gifts
but in his innermost heart he will be conscious that someone who has them is
like someone who does not have them. Or imagine a person with a deeply
religious disposition who from a true and inner love of his fellow humans cast
himself into the sea of despair until he found the absolute, that point where it is
indifferent whether a brow is low or arches more proudly than the heavens, that
point which is not indifference but the absolute validity.
You have several good ideas, many odd notions, a mass of silly ones; keep
them all. I do not insist, but there is one idea I would beg you to hold on to, an
idea which assures me that my own spirit is in kinship with yours. You have
often said you would rather be anything else in the world than a poet since a
poet-existence is, as a rule, a human sacrifice. I, for my part, would by no means
deny there have been poets who have gained their selves before they began to
write; on the other hand, it is also certain that a poet-existence as such lies in the
obscurity that results from despair’s not being carried through, from the soul’s
constantly shivering in despair and the spirit’s being unable to gain its true
transparency. The poetic ideal is always an untrue ideal, for the true ideal is
always what is actual. So when the spirit is not allowed to vault up into its own
eternal world it remains en route and revels in the pictures reflected in the clouds
and weeps over their transience. A poet-existence is therefore, as such, an
unhappy existence, it is higher than the finite and yet not the infinite. The poet
sees the ideals but he has to flee the world in order to take pleasure in them; he
cannot carry these divine images within him in the midst of life’s confusion,
cannot quietly proceed on his way unaffected by the caricature appearing all
around him, not to speak of having the strength to attire himself in those images.
The poet’s life is, therefore, often the object of a petty sympathy on the part of
those who think themselves safe because they have remained in the finite. You
once said in a moment of despondency that no doubt there were already people
who had privately made up their accounts with you and were willing to settle on
the following condition: that you were recognized as a bright fellow, in return
you sank from sight and did not become a useful member of society. Yes, there
undeniably exists in the world a pettiness of this kind, which will triumph in this
way over everything that protrudes just an inch. But do not let it disturb you, do
not defy them, do not scorn them; I would say here, as you usually do, ‘It isn’t
worth the trouble.’ But if you do not want to be a poet there is no other way for
you than the one I have shown you: Despair!
So then choose despair, since despair is itself a choice, for one can doubt
without choosing to, but despair one cannot without choosing to do so. And
when one despairs one chooses again, and what then does one choose? One
chooses oneself, not in one’s immediacy, not as this contingent individual, one
chooses oneself in one’s eternal validity.
I shall endeavour to cast a little more light on this point in your connection. In
recent philosophy there has been more than enough talk about speculation
beginning with doubt; on the other hand, so far as I have been able occasionally
to occupy myself with questions of that kind, I have looked in vain for
information on how doubt differs from despair. Here I shall try to clarify that
distinction, in the hope that it will contribute to orienting you and facing you in
the right direction. I am far from presuming any real philosophical competence, I
do not have your virtuosity in playing with categories, but what in the deepest
sense is the meaning of life, that after all must surely be comprehensible to a
more simple-minded person. Doubt is a despair of thought, despair is a doubt of
the personality. That is why I keep such a tight hold on the category of choice,
that being my watchword, the nerve of my life-view, and that is something I
indeed have even if I make no claim at all to a system.
20 Doubt is the inner
movement in thought itself, and in my doubt I conduct myself as impersonally as
possible. Assume now that, doubt having been applied, thought finds the
absolute and rests in it; it rests in it not as the result of a choice but following the
same necessity according to which it doubted; for doubt itself belongs to the
category of necessity, and rest likewise. It is the sublime aspect of doubt, the
reason why doubt has so often been praised and extolled by people who scarcely
understood what they were saying. But this fact, that it belongs to the category of
necessity, shows that it is not the whole personality that is in motion. So there is
something very true in a person’s saying, ‘I’d like to believe it, but I can’t; I have
to doubt.’ That is also why one often sees how a doubter can still possess
something positive in himself which lives apart from all communication through
thought, that he can be a highly conscientious person who has no doubts
whatever about the validity of duty and about the maxim for his action, no
doubts whatever about a multitude of sympathetic feelings and moods. On the
other hand, especially in our own time, one sees people who have despair in their
hearts but have still conquered doubt. This has particularly struck me in
considering certain of Germany’s philosophers. Their thought is composed, the
objective logical thought is brought to rest in its corresponding objectivity, and
yet they are in despair even though they distract themselves with objective
thinking, for there are many ways a person can distract himself and scarcely any
sedative is more effective than abstract thinking, since there it is a matter of
conducting oneself as impersonally as possible.
Doubt and despair therefore belong to two quite different spheres, different
sides of the soul are set in motion. Still, I am not at all content with this, because
doubt and despair would then rank equally and that is not the case. Despair is a
far deeper and more complete expression, its movement far more comprehensive
than doubt’s. Precisely, despair is an expression of the whole personality, doubt
only of thought. The reputed objectivity of doubt, what makes it so
distinguished, is precisely an expression of its incompleteness. Doubt, therefore,
lies in difference, despair in the absolute. It requires talent to doubt, it requires
no talent at all to despair; but talent as such is difference and what needs talent to
make it effectual can never be the absolute, for it is only for the absolute that the
absolute can be absolute as such. The lowliest, least talented person can despair,
a young girl who is least of all a thinker can despair, while it is easy for anyone
to sense the foolishness of saying of these that they are doubters. The reason
why a person’s doubt can be assuaged and he can still be in despair, and that this
can go on, is that he does not in a deeper sense will despair. In general, one
cannot despair at all unless one wants to, but in order truly to despair one must
truly want to, but when one truly wills despair one is truly beyond it; when one
has truly chosen despair one has truly chosen what despair chooses, namely
oneself in one’s eternal validity. It is only in despair that the personality is
assuaged, though not with necessity, for I never despair necessarily, but with
freedom, and only in despair is the absolute attained. I think in this respect our
age will make progress, so far as I am entitled to an opinion about our age – that
is, seeing I know it only from reading newspapers and the occasional pamphlet,
or from our conversations. The time won’t be far off when, perhaps at some cost,
we will learn that the true point of departure for finding the absolute is not doubt
but despair.
But I return to my category, I am not a logician, I have only one such but I
assure you it is the choice of both my heart and my mind, my soul’s desire and
my salvation – I return to the significance of choice. In choosing absolutely,
then, I choose despair, and in despair I choose the absolute, for I myself am the
absolute, I posit the absolute and am myself the absolute. But, as amounts to
exactly the same, I must say: I choose the absolute which chooses me, I posit the
absolute which posits me. For unless I bear in mind that this second expression
is just as absolute, my category of choice is false; for that category is precisely
the identity of both. What I choose I do not posit, for if it were not posited I
could not choose it, and yet if it were not posited through my choosing it I would
not choose it. It is, for if it was not I could not choose it; it is not, for it only
comes to be by my choosing it, otherwise my choice would be illusory.
But what, then, do I choose? This thing or that? No, I choose absolutely, and I
choose absolutely precisely through having chosen not to choose this thing or
that. I choose the absolute, and what is the absolute? It is myself in my eternal
validity. Anything other than myself I cannot choose as the absolute, for if I
choose something else I choose it as something finite, and therefore do not
choose it absolutely. Even the Jew who chose God did not choose absolutely, for
although he chose the absolute he did not choose it absolutely, and so it ceased to
be the absolute and became something finite.
But what, then, is this self of mine? If it is to be a matter of a first glance, a
first shot at a definition, my answer is: it is the most abstract thing of all which
yet, at the same time, is the most concrete thing of all – it is freedom. Let me
here make a small psychological observation. One often hears people giving vent
to their discontent by complaining of life, one often hears them making wishes.
Imagine such a poor devil, but let us hop over wishes that do not throw light on
anything here because they belong entirely to the contingent. He wishes, ‘If only
I had that man’s mind, or his talents,’ etc. Yes, at the farthest extreme, ‘If only I
had that man’s firmness.’ One hears wishes like this frequently enough, but have
you ever heard a person seriously wish that he could become someone else? So
far is that from being so, that it is precisely typical of what are called
unfortunates that it is they who cling most tightly to themselves, that despite all
their sufferings they would not for all the world want to be someone else; which
has its reason in the fact that such individuals are very near the truth and have a
sense of the eternal validity of personal existence, not in its blessings but in its
torment, even if they have kept to themselves this perfectly abstract expression
of joy in their eternal validity which says they would rather be themselves than
anyone else. As for the man with many wishes, he still thinks of always
remaining himself though everything were changed. So there is something in
him that is absolute in relation to everything else, something whereby he is the
one he is, even if the change he obtains through his wish were the greatest
possible. That he is labouring under a misunderstanding I shall show later; here I
want merely to find the most abstract expression for this ‘self’ which makes him
what he is. And that is nothing else than freedom. Really it would be possible in
this way to offer a highly plausible proof of the eternal validity of personal
existence; yes, even a suicide does not really want to do away with his self; he,
too, has a wish, he wishes he had another form of his self, and there could well
be a suicide, therefore, who was convinced in the highest degree of the
immortality of the soul but whose whole being was so confused that he thought
to find in this way the absolute form of his spirit.
But the reason why it can seem to an individual that he could constantly
change yet remain the same, as if his inmost being were an algebraic entity that
could stand for whatever it might be, is to be found in the fact that he has the
wrong attitude; he has not chosen himself, he has no conception of doing so, and
yet even in his lack of understanding there is an acknowledgement of the eternal
validity of personal existence. For someone with the right attitude, on the other
hand, things go differently. He chooses himself, not in a finite sense, for then this
‘self’ would be something finite along with other finite things, but in an absolute
sense. And still he chooses himself and not another. This self he thus chooses is
infinitely concrete, for it is himself, and yet it is absolutely different from his
former self, for he has chosen it absolutely. This self did not exist previously, for
it came into existence through the choice, and yet it has been in existence, for it
was indeed ‘he himself’.
The choice here makes the two dialectical movements at once: what is chosen
does not exist and comes into existence through the choice, and what is chosen
exists, otherwise it would not be a choice. For if the thing I chose did not exist
but became absolute through the choice itself, I would not have chosen, I would
have created. But I do not create myself, I choose myself. Therefore while nature
has been created out of nothing, while I myself qua my immediate personal
existence have been created out of nothing, as free spirit I am born of the
principle of contradiction, or born by virtue of the fact that I chose myself.
He now discovers that the self he chooses contains an infinite multiplicity
inasmuch as it has a history, a history in which he acknowledges identity with
himself. This is history of a different sort, for in this history he stands in relation
to other individuals of the race and to the race as a whole, and in this history
there is something painful, yet he is only the one he is, with this history.
Therefore it needs courage to choose oneself, for just when he seems to be
becoming most isolated, he is entering more deeply than ever into the roots
through which he is linked with the whole. It alarms him, and yet that is how it
has to be, for when he awakens to the passion of freedom – and that has been
awakened in the choice, just as the choice presupposes it – he chooses himself
and fights to possess it as though for his blessedness, and it is his blessedness.
He can let go of none of this, not the most painful things, not the most grievous,
and yet the expression of this fight, of this acquiring, is – repentance. He repents
himself back into himself, back into the family, back into the race, until he finds
himself in God. Only on these terms can he choose himself and he wants no
others, for only thus can he absolutely choose himself. What, after all, is a
human being without love? Yet there are many kinds of love. I love a father in a
different way from a mother, my wife in still another way, and every different
love has its different expression, but there is also a love wherewith I love God,
and there is only one expression for this in language: repentance. If I do not love
Him thus I do not love Him absolutely, not from my inmost being; any other
love for the absolute is a misunderstanding since – to take what people usually
praise so highly and I myself have respect for – when thinking clings to the
absolute with all its love it is not the absolute I love, I do not love absolutely
since I love necessarily; as soon as I love freely and love God, I repent. And
were there no other reason for repentance being the expression of my love of
God, there is this reason: that he loved me first. And yet this is an incomplete
account, for it is only if I choose myself as guilty that I choose myself absolutely,
if ever my choosing myself absolutely is not to be identical with creating myself.
And if the sins of the father were inherited by the son, this too he repents, for
only in this way can he choose himself, choose himself absolutely. And if the
tears are just about to efface him completely, he still keeps on repenting, for only
thus does he choose himself. It is as though his self is outside him and is to be
taken possession of, and the repentance is his love of it, because he chooses it
absolutely, from the hand of the eternal God.
What I have stated here is no rostrum-wisdom, it is something every person
who wants to can propound, and which every person can want to when he will. I
have not learnt it in the auditorium, I have learnt it in the living-room, or in the
nursery if you will, for when I see my little son running across the floor, so
joyful, so happy, I think, ‘Who knows, perhaps I’ve had a very damaging
influence on him? God knows I take all possible care of him, but that thought
doesn’t put me at ease.’ Then I say to myself, ‘There’ll come a moment in his
life when his spirit too will be matured in the instant of choice, then he will
choose himself, then he will also repent whatever guilt of mine may rest upon
him. And there’s something pleasing about a son’s repenting his father’s sins,
though he won’t do it on my account but because it is only in this way that he
can choose himself. So let things go as they will; often what one considers best
has the most damaging consequences for a person, but all this is nothing after all.
I can do a lot for him, that’s what I’ll strive for, but the highest he can only do
for himself.’ You see why people have such difficulty in choosing themselves:
here absolute isolation is identical with the deepest continuity, and as long as one
has not chosen oneself it is as if there was a possibility of becoming something
different, in one way or another.
Here, then, you have my humblest opinion on what it is to choose and to
repent. It is unseemly to love a young girl as though she were one’s mother, or
one’s mother as though she were a young girl. Every love has its peculiarity;
love of God has its absolute peculiarity, its expression is repentance. […] A
theologian will be able to base a host of reflections on this point. These I shall
not go into further since I am only a layman. I shall try only to throw light on the
foregoing with the comment that it is in Christianity that repentance first found
its true expression. The pious Jew felt the sins of the fathers weigh upon him, yet
he did not feel it nearly as deeply as the Christian, because the pious Jew could
not repent it, for he could not choose himself absolutely. The guilt of the fathers
weighed upon him, brooded over him, he sank beneath this burden, he sighed,
but he could not lift it; only the one who chooses himself absolutely can do that,
through repentance. The greater the freedom the greater the guilt, and that is the
secret of blessedness, and if not cowardice, it is at least faintheartedness not to
want to repent the sins of the fathers; if not to be despised, it is at least petty and
devoid of magnanimity.
So then the choice of despair is ‘my self’, for although when I despair I despair
over myself as over all else, the self I despair over is a finitude as every other
finite thing, while the self I choose is the absolute self or my self according to its
absolute validity. That being so, you will again see why I kept on saying in the
above that the either/or I proposed between living aesthetically and ethically is
not a perfect dilemma, because there is really only one option. Through choosing
it I do not really choose between good and evil, I choose the good, but by virtue
of choosing the good I choose the option between good and evil. The original
choice is constantly present in every subsequent choice.
So despair, then, and your frivolity shall never more cause you to roam like an
inconstant spirit, like a ghost among the ruins of a world which is yet lost to you;
despair, and your spirit shall never more sigh in melancholy, for the world shall
become beautiful and joyous to you once more, though you now look at it with
different eyes, and your spirit, now liberated, shall vault up into the world of
freedom.
Here I could break off, for I have now brought you to the point I wished. For
this, should you yourself wish it, is where you are. My aim was for you to tear
yourself away from the illusions of the aesthetic, and from a dream of half
despair, in order to awaken to the earnest of spirit. However, I have no intention
of doing that, since I want now to give you, from this vantage-point, a way of
looking at life, an ethical life-view. It is only a frugal offering, partly because my
talents are in no way commensurate to the task, partly because frugality is a
prime characteristic of everything ethical, a characteristic which can be arresting
enough for someone coming from the abundance of the aesthetic. Here what
matters is nil ad ostentationem, omnia ad conscientiam.
21 Breaking off at this
point might also seem questionable for another reason: one might easily get the
impression that I had ended up in a sort of quietism,
22 where the personality
necessarily comes to rest as thought does in the absolute. What then would be
the good of having gained oneself, what would be the good of getting a sword
which could conquer the whole world if one did nothing with it but thrust it into
the scabbard?
But before going on to present such an ethical view of life in more detail, I will
indicate in a few words the danger that lies before one in the moment of despair,
the reef one can run aground on and be totally shipwrecked. The Scriptures say,
‘What is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world and suffer harm to his
own soul?’
23
[…] But the expression ‘suffer harm to his own soul’ is an ethical
one, and the person who thinks he has an ethical life-view must also presume to
be able to interpret it. One hears the phrase frequently, yet any person who wants
to understand it must have felt deep commotions in his soul; yes, he must have
despaired, for what are really set before us here are the motions of despair: on
the one hand the whole world, on the other one’s own soul. You will readily
perceive that, if one pursues this phrase, one arrives at the same abstract
definition of ‘soul’ which, in our psychological consideration of the desire to
become another, though without becoming another, we reached earlier as the
definition of ‘self’. For when I can gain the whole world yet suffer harm to my
soul, the phrase ‘whole world’ must also include all the finitudes I possess in
virtue of my immediacy. My soul then proves impervious to these. When I can
lose the whole world without suffering harm to my soul, the phrase ‘the whole
world’ again includes all those determinations of finitude that are mine in virtue
of my immediacy, and yet my soul remains unharmed; it is accordingly
impervious to them. I can lose my wealth, my esteem in the eyes of others, my
mental powers, and still not suffer harm to my soul. I can gain all these and still
suffer harm. What then is my soul, what is this inmost being of mine that can
remain unaffected by this loss and suffer harm with this gain? This movement is
manifest to the despairer, it is no rhetorical phrase but the only adequate one
when, on the one hand, he sees the whole world and, on the other, himself, his
soul. In the moment of despair the distinction makes itself apparent, and now it
is a matter of how he despairs, for, as I explained above in connection with every
aesthetic view of life, it is despair to gain the whole world and gain it in such a
way that one suffers harm to one’s soul; and yet it is my heartfelt conviction that
it is a man’s true salvation to despair. Here, again, we have the importance of
willing one’s own despair, willing it in an infinite sense, in an absolute sense, for
such willing is identical with absolute self-surrender. If, on the other hand, I will
my despair in a finite sense I suffer harm to my soul, for then my inmost being
does not attain its breakthrough in despair; on the contrary, it isolates itself, it is
hardened, so that finite despair is a hardening, absolute despair an infinitization.
If in my despair I gain the whole world, I suffer harm to my soul by making
myself finite, I have my life in that world; when I despair over losing the whole
world I suffer harm to my soul, for I make it finite in exactly the same way, since
here again I see my soul as posited with finitude. […] Every finite despair is a
choice of the finite, for I choose it as much when I lose it as when I gain it; for
what lies in my power is not whether I gain it, but my choosing it. Finite despair
is therefore an unfree despair. Really despair is not the aim, but finitude, yet that
is despair. A person can now hold out at this point, and as long as he stays there I
cannot really bring myself to say to him that he has suffered harm to his soul. He
stands at a highly dangerous point. At every moment there is the possibility of its
happening. The despair is there but it has not yet attacked his inmost being. Only
when in a finite sense he hardens himself in the despair, only then does he suffer
harm to his soul. His soul is as if anaesthetized in despair, and only when, on
coming round, he chooses a finite way out of his despair, only then does he
suffer harm to his soul; he has isolated himself, his rational soul is stifled and he
is transformed into a beast of prey that shuns no means since everything for him
is self-defence. There lies a dreadful anxiety in this thought that a person has
suffered harm to his soul, yet everyone who has despaired will have had a
presentiment of this false path, this perdition. That a person can suffer harm to
his soul in this way is certain; whether it is actually the case with a particular
person is impossible to tell, and no one ventures here to judge another. A man’s
life may look strange and one may be tempted to believe it of him, yet he
himself may have quite a different interpretation which assures him of the
opposite; on the other hand, a person may have suffered harm to his soul without
anyone suspecting it, for this harm lies not on the outside but in the person’s
inmost being. It is like the rot in the core of the fruit: while the outside can look
appetizing, it gives no hint of the inner hollowness.
So when you choose yourself absolutely you easily find out that this self is not
an abstraction or a tautology; at the most it may seem so in the moment of
orientation when one separates to the point of finding the most abstract
expression of this self, but it is still just an illusion that it is altogether abstract
and without content, for after all it is not the consciousness of freedom in
general, since that is a determination of thought; it is the product of a choice and
is the consciouness of this determinate free being which is himself and no other.
This self contains a rich concretion, a multitude of determinate qualities, of
characteristics; it is, in short, the whole aesthetic self which is chosen ethically.
Therefore the more you become absorbed in yourself, the greater sense you will
have of the significance even of the insignificant, not in a finite but in an infinite
sense, because it is through you that it is posited, and when one chooses oneself
in an ethical sense it is not just a reflection upon oneself. To characterize this act,
one might recall the word of the Scriptures about giving account of every idle
word that men shall speak.
24 For when the passion of freedom is awakened,
freedom is jealous of itself and by no means allows it to remain thus
indeterminate as between what does and does not belong to it. So while in the
first instant of choice the person proceeds apparently as naked as the child from
its mother’s womb, the next instant it is concrete in itself, and it is only by an
arbitrary abstraction that someone can remain at that point. He becomes himself
– quite the same as he was before, down to the least significant peculiarity – and
yet he becomes another, for the choice permeates everything and transforms it.
Thus is his finite personality now made infinite in the choice in which he
infinitely chooses himself.
So now he owns himself as posited by himself, that is, as chosen by himself, as
free; but when he owns himself in this way, an absolute difference appears, that
between good and evil. So long as he has not chosen himself this difference
remains latent. How in general does the difference between good and evil
emerge? Can we think it – that is, is it something for thought? No. Here the point
comes up again that I touched on above, how philosophy could seem actually to
have abolished the principle of contradiction, the reason being that it has not yet
reached it. Whenever I think, my relation to what it is I am thinking is one of
necessity, but that is exactly why the difference between good and evil does not
arise. Think anything you like, think the most abstract categories of all, think the
most concrete, you never think in the category of good and evil; think the whole
of history and you think the necessary movement of the Idea, but you never
think in the category of good and evil. You always think relative differences,
never the absolute difference. Philosophy, so far as I can judge, may well be
justified in claiming it cannot think an absolute contradiction, but it by no means
follows that the latter does not exist. In thinking, I make myself infinite, but not
absolutely, since I disappear into the absolute; it is only when I choose myself
absolutely that I make myself infinite absolutely, for I myself am the absolute,
for it is only myself that I can choose absolutely, and this absolute choice of
myself is my freedom; only when I have absolutely chosen myself have I posited
an absolute difference, namely that between good and evil.
In order to abolish the element of self-determination in thought, philosophy
says, ‘The absolute is by virtue of my thinking it.’ But since philosophy itself
sees that this implies free thought (not necessary thought, which is the one it
usually acclaims), it replaces this expression with another, namely that my
thought of the absolute is the ‘absolute’s self-thinking’ in me. This expression is
not at all identical with the previous one, but on the other hand it is entirely
appropriate. For here my thought is an element in the absolute, that is where the
necessity of my thought lies, that is where the necessity with which I think the
absolute lies. Things are different with the good. The good is by virtue of my
willing it, and otherwise it has no existence. This is the expression of freedom;
similarly with evil, it is only by virtue of my willing it. This is in no way to
belittle the categories of good and evil or to reduce them to merely subjective
determinations. On the contrary, it is to assert the absolute validity of these
categories. The good is the in-and-for-itself posited by the in-and-for-itself, and
that is freedom.
25
My use of the expression ‘choosing oneself absolutely’ may seem
questionable, for it might be taken to imply that I chose good and evil equally
absolutely, and that both good and evil belonged to me equally essentially. To
prevent this misunderstanding I used the expression ‘repenting myself out of the
whole of existence’. For repentance is the expression of the fact that evil is an
essential part of me, and at the same time the expression of the fact that it is not
essentially a part of me. If evil were not an essential part of me I could not
choose it, but if there were something in me that I could not choose absolutely,
then there would be no question of my choosing myself absolutely; I would not
be the absolute myself, but only a product.
Here I will break off these reflections in order to show how an ethical life-view
looks at the person and life and its meaning. For form’s sake I return to some
observations made earlier about the relation between the aesthetic and the
ethical. We said that every aesthetic life-view was despair; this was because it
was built upon what may or may not be. That is not the case with the ethical lifeview, for this builds life upon what has being as its essential property. The
aesthetic, we said, is that in which a person is immediately what he is; the ethical
is that whereby a person becomes what he becomes. This in no way implies that
someone who lives aesthetically does not develop, but he develops with
necessity, not with freedom; there occurs no metamorphosis in his case, no
infinite movement whereby he arrives at the point from which he becomes what
he becomes.
When an individual considers himself aesthetically, he becomes conscious of
this self of his as a multiple concretion inwardly determined in many ways, but
in spite of all the inner diversity it is all still his nature, everything has just as
much right to come to light, is just as entitled to demand satisfaction. His soul is
like soil from which there spring all kinds of herbs, all equally entitled to thrive;
it is in this diversity that his self lies, and he has no self higher than this. Now, if
he has what you so often speak of, namely aesthetic seriousness and a little
worldly wisdom, he will see that it is impossible for everything to thrive equally.
So he will choose, and what decides his choice is a more-or-less, which is a
relative difference. Let us now suppose someone were able to live without
coming in contact with the ethical; he would then be able to say, ‘I have it in me
to be a Don Juan, a Faust, a robber chief; I shall now cultivate this trait since
aesthetic seriousness demands that I become something definite, that I let the
seedling planted in me develop fully.’ Aesthetically, that way of looking at
personality and its development would be perfectly proper. From this you see
what an aesthetic development means: it is a development like that of the plant,
and although the individual becomes something, what it becomes is what it is
immediately. For someone who regards personhood ethically there is, from the
very first, an absolute difference, namely that between good and evil, and if he
finds more evil than good, that still does not mean that evil is what has to come
to the fore, but that evil is to be suppressed and the good allowed to come to the
fore. So when the individual develops ethically, he comes to be what he
becomes; for even when he gives rein to the aesthetic in him (which for him
means something else than for the one who lives merely aesthetically), it has
nevertheless been removed from its throne. […]
It takes much ethical courage not to be distinguished by difference but to be
content with the universal. […] Everyone who lives merely aesthetically […] has
a secret dread of despairing, for he knows very well that what despair brings out
is the universal, and at the same time he knows that his life is based on
difference. The higher the individual stands, the more differences he has done
away with or despaired over, but he always retains one difference which he will
not do away with, on which his life is based. It is curious to see the admirable
assurance with which even the most simple-minded discover what one might call
their aesthetic difference, however insignificant that may be, and one of life’s
miseries is the foolish controversy carried on about which difference is more
significant than another. Aesthetic minds also express their aversion to despair
by saying it is a break. This expression is quite appropriate so far as one
supposes life’s development to consist of a necessary unfolding of the
immediate. If that is not the case, then despair is no break but a transfiguration.
Only a person despairing over something in particular suffers a break, but that is
just because he does not despair to the full. Aesthetes are also afraid that life will
lose the diverting multiplicity it has so long as one looks at it as though every
single individual lived under aesthetic categories. Once again, this is a
misunderstanding, no doubt fostered by a number of rigoristic theories. In
despair nothing is destroyed, all a person’s aesthetic qualities remain, it is just
that they become ancillary and are preserved for that very reason. Yes, it is
indeed true that one does not live in the aesthetic as one did, but it by no means
follows that one loses it. It may be true that one uses it otherwise, but it does not
follow that it has gone away. All the ethicist does is to carry to its conclusion the
doubt which the higher aesthete had already set in motion but which he broke off
arbitrarily; for, however great his difference, it is still only relative. And when
the aesthetician himself admits that the difference which gives his life meaning
is also transitory, but adds that it is still always best to enjoy it as long as one has
it, this is really a cowardice in love with a certain kind of enjoyment of ease,
under not too high a ceiling, and is unworthy of a human being. It is as though
someone were to rejoice in some relationship based on a misunderstanding
which, sooner or later, would have to come into the open, and lacked the courage
to be cognizant of this or to admit it, but rejoiced in the relationship as long as
possible. However, this is not the case with you; you are like someone who has
admitted the misunderstanding, broken off the relationship, but then wants to be
forever taking leave of it.
The aesthetic view also considers personal existence in its relation to the
environment, and the expression of this in its impact on the individual is
pleasure. But the aesthetic expression of pleasure in its relation to personal
existence is mood. For the person is present in the mood but present only in a
shadowy way. A person living aesthetically tries as much as possible to be
completely taken up in the mood; he tries to hide himself totally within it, so that
there is nothing in him which cannot be bent into conformity with it, for any
residue always has a disturbing effect, it is an element of continuity that tries to
hold him back. The more his personal being merges into mood, the more the
individual is in the moment, and again this is the most adequate expression of
aesthetic existence: it is in the moment. Hence the huge oscillations to which the
person who lives aesthetically is exposed. A person living ethically also knows
mood, but for him it is not the most important thing; because he has chosen
himself infinitely he sees the mood beneath him. The remainder that will not fit
into the mood is exactly that continuity which is for him what is most important.
Someone living ethically has […] a memory of his life, a person living
aesthetically certainly has not. Someone living ethically does not do away with
mood, he sizes it up for an instant, but this instant saves him from living in the
moment, this instant gives him mastery over desire, for the art of mastering
desire consists not so much in doing away with it, or giving it up altogether, as in
determining the instant. Take any pleasure you like, its secret, its strength,
consists in its being contained absolutely in the moment. True, one often hears
people saying that the only way is to abstain altogether. That is a very mistaken
way and only succeeds for a while. Take someone who has become addicted to
gambling. Desire is aroused with all its passion, it is as though his life were at
stake if the desire is not satisfied. If he can say to himself, ‘Not just now; in an
hour’s time’, he is cured. This hour is the continuity that saves him. For someone
living aesthetically the mood is always eccentric, because he has his centre at the
periphery. Personal being has its centre in itself, and someone who does not have
himself is eccentric. Someone living ethically, however, has his mood
centralized, he is not inside the mood, he is not the mood itself, he has mood and
has the mood in him. What he works for is continuity and that is always master
over mood. His life does not lack mood, indeed it has a total mood, but it is
acquired; it is what one could call equability, but this is no aesthetic mood, and
no one has it by nature or immediately.
But he who has now infinitely chosen himself – can he say, ‘Now I own
myself, I ask nothing more, and to all the world’s vicissitudes I oppose the proud
thought: I am the one I am’? By no means! If anyone were to express themselves
in that way one could easily see they had gone astray. The basic mistake would
also lie in his not having chosen himself in the strictest sense; choose himself he
may have done, but he has done it from outside himself; he had understood quite
abstractly what it was to choose and had failed to grasp himself in his
concretion; he had not so chosen himself that, in the choice, he came to be
within himself, had not clothed himself in himself; he had chosen himself in
respect of his necessity, not of his freedom; he had taken the ethical option in
vain, aesthetically. The more truly meaningful the outcome that emerges, the
more dangerous are the false paths, and here too, accordingly, there appears a
dreadful false path. Once the individual has grasped himself in his eternal
validity, this overwhelms him with all its fullness. The temporal vanishes from
sight. At first it fills him with an indescribable bliss and gives him a sense of
absolute security. If, then, it is this that he begins to gaze one-sidedly upon, the
temporal presses its claims. They are rejected. What the temporal has to offer,
the more-or-less that presents itself here, is for him so very unimportant
compared with what he owns eternally. Everything stops short for him, it is as
though he had reached eternity before his time. He becomes lost in
contemplation, he gazes at himself, but his gazing cannot fill up the time. It then
seems to him that time, the temporal, is his ruin, he demands a perfect form of
life, and here again appears a fatigue similar to the languor attending pleasure.
This apathy can rest so broodingly over a person that suicide seems the only way
out. No power can wrest his self from him, the only power is time, yet neither
can this wrest his self from him, but checks and delays him, it detains the
spiritual embrace in which he grasps himself. He has not chosen himself; like
Narcissus, he has fallen in love with himself.
26
It is certainly not seldom such a
situation has ended in suicide.
The mistake lies in the fact that he has not chosen in the right way, not just in
the sense that he has been insensible of his errors, but he has seen himself in the
category of necessity. Himself, this person with all these multiple characteristics,
he has seen as part of the way of the world, he has seen his self over against the
eternal power, whose fire has permeated it but without consuming it. But he has
not seen himself in his freedom, has not chosen himself in that. If he does that,
the very moment he chooses himself he is in motion; however concrete his self
is, he has still chosen himself in respect of his possibility, he has purchased his
freedom in order to stay in it, but he can only stay in his freedom by constantly
realizing it. It is for that reason he has chosen himself, by virtue of that fact he is
active.
Here might be the place to say a few words about a life-view which you find
most agreeable, particularly as teacher, sometimes also as practitioner. What it
amounts to is nothing less than that the real meaning of life, after all, is sorrow,
and being the unhappiest is the happiest thing of all. At first glance this does not
look like an aesthetic view of life, for its slogan can scarcely be pleasure.
Neither, however, is it ethical, but it lies at the dangerous transition between the
aesthetic and the ethical, where the soul is so easily seduced by one or another
version of the theory of predestination. You proclaim a number of false
doctrines, and this is about the worst, but you know also it is the one most fitted
for sneaking your way in upon people and drawing them to you. You can be as
heartless as any, you can joke about everything, even about man’s pain. You are
not unaware that young people are tempted by this, yet this conduct puts you at
some distance from them, for such behaviour repels as much as it attracts. If it is
a young woman you want to deceive in this way, you cannot but notice that a
womanly soul has too much depth to be captivated permanently by such things;
yes, even if you engaged her attention for a moment, she will soon end up
wearying of it and forming something close to an aversion to you because her
soul is in no need of such titillation. The method is then changed; in isolated
enigmatic outbursts, which only she can understand, you let it be hinted that it
can all be explained by a remote melancholy. You open yourself only to her, but
with such caution that she really never gets to know anything more; you leave it
to her imagination to depict the details of the profound sadness you hide within
you. Shrewd, one cannot deny you are that, and it is true what a young girl said
about you, that probably you will end up a Jesuit. The more subtly you can pass
them the thread that leads deeper and deeper into the secrets of sadness, the more
joyful you are, the more sure of drawing them to you. You do not make long
speeches, you do not protest your pain in firm handclasps, or by ‘gazing
romantically into the romantic eyes of a kindred soul’; you are too smart for that.
You avoid witnesses, and only occasionally let yourself be taken by surprise. At
a certain age, there is no more dangerous poison to a young girl than sadness;
you know that, and this knowledge may, like any other, be all very well in itself;
your use of it, on the other hand, is not something I shall praise. […]
It is part of the whole development in modern times that people are more
disposed to feel sorrow than joy. It is considered a higher view of life, and so it
is, inasmuch as it is natural to want to be joyful, and unnatural to sorrow. On top
of that there is the fact that being joyful does after all impose a certain obligation
on the individual to be thankful, even if his thoughts are too confused for him to
know just whom he should thank; sorrow absolves one from that and vanity is
then better satisfied. Besides, our age has experienced the vanity of life in so
many ways that it does not believe in joy, and as it still has to have something to
believe in, it believes in sorrow. Joy passes away, it says, but sorrow lasts and
anyone who bases his view of life on it builds on a solid foundation.
If we ask now more explicitly what sort of sorrow it is you are talking about,
you are shrewd enough to evade ethical sorrow. It is not repentance you mean;
no, it is aesthetic sorrow, reflected sorrow in particular. It is based not on guilt
but on misfortune, on fate, on a sad disposition, the influence of others, etc. It is
something with which you are all too familiar from novels. When you read it
there you laugh at it, if you hear others talk of it you mock them; but when you
yourself discourse on it, it makes sense and there is truth in it.
Now although the view that takes sorrow to be the meaning of life can seem
itself to be sorrowful enough, I cannot neglect to show you, from an angle you
perhaps would not expect, that it offers no comfort. […] Someone who says that
sorrow is the meaning of life has joy outside him in the same way that someone
who wants to be joyful has sorrow outside him. Joy may take him by surprise in
exactly the same way that sorrow can take the other. So his life-view is tied to a
condition which is not under his control, for it is really just as little under
someone’s control to refrain from joy as to refrain from sorrow. But any lifeview with a condition outside it is despair. And so wanting to sorrow is despair
in exactly the same sense as wanting to seek joy, since it is always despair to
have one’s life centred in something whose nature it is to cease to be. […]
The deeper the source of sorrow, the more it can seem that one might preserve
it all one’s life, as if there was indeed nothing one need do to make it so, it will
stay as a matter of course. If it is some particular event, that will prove very
difficult. You yourself are fully aware of that, and so when you want to
pronounce on the meaning of sorrow for the whole of life you think mainly of
unhappy characters and tragic heroes. It is a feature of the entire spiritual
disposition of the unhappy character that he is unable to be happy or joyful, a
fate broods over him, and similarly over the tragic hero. So here you are
perfectly justified in saying that sorrow is the meaning of life; and this has
brought us to plain fatalism, which always has something seductive about it.
Here also you encounter your allegation which amounts neither more nor less to
the claim that you yourself are the unhappiest man. And yet it is undeniable that
this thought is the proudest and most defiant that can arise in a man’s brain.
Let me answer you as you deserve. First of all, you do not sorrow. This you
know full well, for it is your favourite saying that the unhappiest is the happiest.
But this is a falsification more appalling than any other; it is a falsification which
turns against the eternal power that governs the world, it is a rebellion against
God, like wanting to laugh when you should weep; and yet there is a despair that
is capable of it, there is a defiance that pits itself against God. But that is also
treason against the human race. True, you too distinguish between sorrows, but
you think there is a difference so great as to allow a kind that it is impossible to
bear. But if such a sorrow exists, it is not for you to decide which it is, one
difference is as good as another, and you have betrayed man’s deepest and most
sacred right or grace. It is treason against what is great, a mean envy, for what it
comes down to is that the great men have not been subjected to the most
dangerous trials, have slipped easily into their honours, and that they would also
have succumbed had the superhuman temptation you speak of come their way.
And is this the way you intend to honour what is great, by belittling it? You
mean to bear witness to it by denying it?
And do not misunderstand me now. I am not the kind that thinks one should
not sorrow, I despise that petty common sense, and if this is all the choice there
is, then I choose sorrow. No, I am aware that to sorrow is beautiful, and that
there is mettle in tears; but I also know that one shall not sorrow as one who has
not hope. There is an absolute opposition between us that can never be
abolished. I cannot live in aesthetic categories, I feel what I hold most sacred is
destroyed; I need a higher expression and the ethical gives me that. And this is
where sorrow first acquires its true and profound meaning. Do not be shocked by
what I am about to say here, do not hold it against me that, while speaking of
sorrows which need heroes to bear them, I can talk of children.
It is a sign of a well-behaved child that it is disposed to ask permission without
pondering too deeply whether it is in the right or not; and so it is a sign of a
magnanimous man of profound soul that he is disposed to repent, that he does
not go to law with God but repents and loves God in his repentance. Without that
his life is nothing, merely like foam on water. Yes, I assure you that if my own
life, through no fault of my own, were so fraught with sorrows and sufferings
that I could call myself the greatest tragic hero, revel in my pain, and appal the
world by calling attention to it, my choice is made; I divest myself of the hero’s
apparel and of tragedy’s pathos, I am not the afflicted one who can be proud of
his suffering, I am the humble one who is aware of his sin. I have only one
expression for what I suffer – guilt; one expression for my pain – repentance;
one hope before my eyes – forgiveness; and if I find this difficult, ah! I have but
one prayer, I will throw myself to the ground and implore the eternal power that
governs the world for one grace, early and late, that I be allowed to repent. For I
know only one sorrow which can bring me to despair and plunge everything
down into it – the sorrow that repentance was a delusion, a delusion not in
respect of the forgiveness it seeks, but in the accountability it presupposes.
And do you think that this conduct shows that I fail to give sorrow its due, that
I am running away from it? By no means! I deposit it within my being and for
that reason I never forget it. By and large it is mistrust of the validity of spirit not
to dare to believe that I can have something within me without looking at it at
every instant. In everyday life whatever one most wishes to set aside one
deposits in a place one does not come to every day; so too in a spiritual sense. I
have sorrow within me, and I know that it will continue to be part of my being. I
know it far more surely than someone who from dread of losing it takes it out
every day.
My life has never been so agitated that I felt tempted by the chaotic wish to
throw all existence into confusion, but in my daily life I have often discovered
how profitable it is to give sorrow an ethical expression, not to erase the
aesthetic factor in sorrow but to master it ethically. As long as sorrow is quiet
and humble, I do not fear it; if it becomes vehement and passionate, sophistical
so that it deludes me into despondency, I arise, I brook no rebellion, I will have
nothing in the world cheat me of what I have from God’s hand as a gift of grace.
I do not chase sorrow away, do not try to forget it, I repent. […]
Perhaps you see now why I take up this life-view here. Personal being is here
again viewed under the category of necessity, and there is only enough freedom
left constantly to keep the individual half awake, as in a restless dream, and to
lead him astray into the labyrinth of suffering and dispensation where he sees
himself everywhere yet cannot come to himself. It is incredible how
irresponsibly one sees problems like these dealt with. Even systematic thinkers
treat [freedom] as a natural curiosity they have nothing more to say about, but
can only describe, without it ever occurring to them that, if there were such a
natural curiosity, all the rest of their wisdom is nonsense and illusion. That is
why one feels helped quite otherwise by the Christian view than by all the
wisdom of the philosophers. It assigns everything to sin, something philosophy
is too aesthetic to have the ethical courage to do. And yet this courage is the only
thing that can save life and man, unless one is to break off one’s scepticism at a
whim and join forces with some like-minded persons on what to count as true.
The first form the choice takes is a complete isolation. For in choosing myself
I sever myself from my relationship to the whole world until, in this separation, I
end in an abstract identity. When the individual has chosen himself in respect of
his freedom he is by that very fact active. Yet his action has no relation to any
surrounding world, for the individual has completely done away with the latter
and is only for himself. The life-view here presented is, however, an ethical
view. In Greece it was expressed in a single individual’s endeavour to develop
himself into a paragon of virtue. As later with the anchorites in Christendom,
one withdrew from life’s activities, not to steep oneself in metaphysical musings,
but to act, not outwardly, but within oneself. This inner action was at once the
individual’s task and satisfaction, for it was no part of his purpose to cultivate
himself the better to be able to serve the State later on; no, in this cultivation the
individual was sufficient unto himself and abandoned the life of the State, never
to return to it. Really, then, one didn’t withdraw from life; on the contrary, one
remained within its diversity because contact with it was pedagogically
necessary for one’s own sake; but civic life as such had no significance for one –
through some or other sorcerer’s spell one had rendered it harmless, indifferent,
unimportant. So the virtues the individual developed were not civic virtues (as
the virtues in paganism really were, corresponding to the religious virtues in
Christianity), they were the personal virtues: courage, perseverance, temperance,
moderation, etc. Naturally, in our own times one very seldom sees this life-view
put into practice, since everyone is too much affected by the religious to stay
with such an abstract specification of virtue. It is easy to see what the defect is
with this life-view. The error is that the individual has chosen himself altogether
abstractly, and so the perfection he desired and attained was similarly abstract. It
was for that reason I stressed that choosing oneself and repenting oneself are
identical, for repentance puts the individual into the most heartfelt connection,
and the most intimate cohesion, with the surrounding world.
Analogies to this Greek view have often been seen, even occasionally in the
Christian world, except that in Christianity a seasoning of mystical and religious
elements makes it richer and more beautiful. Whatever heights of virtuosity a
Greek who developed himself into a perfect compendium of all personal virtues
might attain, his life is still no less mortal than the world whose temptation his
virtue conquered; his blessedness is a lonely self-contentment, transient as
everything else. Now, the life of a mystic is far deeper. He has chosen himself
absolutely, for although a mystic is less often heard to express himself in this
way, although he generally uses the seemingly opposite expression that he has
chosen God, it comes to the same as was shown above. For unless he has chosen
himself absolutely he is not in any free relationship to God, and the characteristic
of Christian piety lies in freedom. In the language of the mystic this free
relationship to God is often expressed by saying that He is the absolute Thou.
The mystic has chosen himself absolutely, according therefore to his freedom,
and consequently is by that very fact active, but his action is inner action. The
mystic chooses himself in his complete isolation; for him the whole world is
dead and done away with and the weary soul chooses God, or itself. This
expression, ‘the weary soul’, must not be misunderstood, not misused to demean
the mystic as if there were something dubious about the soul’s choosing God
only when it had become weary of the world. No doubt what the mystic is
conveying through this expression is his repentance at not having chosen God
earlier, and his weariness should not be regarded as the same thing as boredom
with life. Here already you will see how little the mystic’s life is given to the
ethical, since the highest expression of his repentance is to repent that he had not
chosen God earlier, before he became concrete in the world, while his soul was
merely abstractly defined, that is, as a child.
The mystic, in having chosen, is by that very fact active. But his action is inner
action. Inasmuch as he is active his life has a movement, a development, a
history. However, a development can be metaphysical or aesthetic to such a
degree that it is doubtful whether in any proper sense one should call it a history,
since one thinks of that as a development in the form of freedom. A movement
can be haphazard to such a degree that one can doubt whether it should be called
a development. Thus, if the movement consists in the same factor occurring
again and again, undeniably we have movement, indeed one can perhaps
discover a law of its motion; but we have no development. The repetition in time
is without meaning, and continuity is lacking. This is very largely true of the life
of the mystic. A mystic’s meanings about the moments of dullness make
appalling reading. But when the dull moment has gone there comes the moment
of light, and so his life is constantly changing, it has movement indeed, but no
development. His life lacks continuity. What really provides that in the life of the
mystic is a feeling, namely longing, whether this longing is directed at what has
gone or at what is to come. But the fact that what makes up the interval is a
feeling shows precisely that cohesion is lacking. A mystic’s development is
metaphysically and aesthetically determined to such a degree that one can hardly
call it history, except in the sense in which one speaks of the history of a plant.
For the mystic, the whole world is dead, he has fallen in love with God. The
development of his life is then the unfolding of this love. Just as there are
instances of lovers bearing some resemblance to one another, even outwardly, in
their expression, their physiognomy, so is the mystic absorbed in the
contemplation of the Deity, and the latter’s image is more and more reflected in
his loving soul; thus the mystic renews and revives the lost divine image in man.
The more he contemplates, the more clearly this image is reflected in him, the
more he comes himself to resemble this image. His inner action consists not,
then, in the acquisition of the personal virtues but in the development of the
religious or contemplative virtues. Yet even this is too ethical an expression for
his life, and his real life is therefore prayer. That prayer is also part of an ethical
life I will not deny, but the more ethically a man lives, the more the prayer has
the character of an intention, so that there is an element of intention even in the
prayer of thanksgiving. With the mystic’s prayer it is otherwise. For him prayer
means all the more the more erotic it is, the more it is inflamed by a burning
love. The prayer is the expression of his love, the only language in which he can
address the Deity with whom he has fallen in love. As in earthly life the lovers
long for the moment when they can breathe their love to one another, let their
souls fuse in a soft whisper, so the mystic longs for the moment when in his
prayer he can, as it were, steal into the presence of God. As the lovers experience
in that whisper their greatest bliss when really they have nothing at all to talk
about, so the mystic in his prayer is all the more blessed, his love all the more
happy, the less content there is in it, the more nearly in his sigh he vanishes from
before his own very eyes.
Perhaps it would not be too much of a diversion here to bring out more clearly
what is untrue in such a life, especially since a person of any profundity is
always liable to be impressed by it. Thus you yourself are by no means lacking
in what it takes to be a mystic, at least for a while. This is, in general, the area
where the greatest contrasts meet, the purest and most innocent souls and the
guiltiest, the most gifted and the most simple-minded.
First I will state, quite simple-mindedly, what really offends me in such a life.
This is my personal judgement. Later I shall try to show the accuracy of my
indications of its dubious sides, as well as the reasons 